Chapter 7
Knowledge of the Absolute
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy asakta-manah partha
yogam yunjan mad-asrayah
asamsayam samagram mam
yatha jnasyasi tac chrnu
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Lord said; mayi--unto Me; asakta-manah-
-mind attached; partha--O son of Prtha; yogam--self-realization;
yunjan--so practicing; mat-asrayah--in consciousness of Me (Krsna
consciousness); asamsayam--without doubt; samagram--completely; mam--
unto Me; yatha--as much as; jnasyasi--you can know; tat--that; srnu--
try to hear.
TRANSLATION
Now hear, O son of Prtha [Arjuna], how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me in full,
free from doubt.
PURPORT
In this Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the nature of Krsna
consciousness is fully described. Krsna is full in all opulences, and
how He manifests such opulences is described herein. Also, four kinds
of fortunate people who become attached to Krsna and four kinds of
unfortunate people who never take to Krsna are described in this
chapter.
In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita, the living entity has been
described as nonmaterial spirit soul which is capable of elevating
himself to self-realization by different types of yogas. At the end of
the Sixth Chapter, it has been clearly stated that the steady
concentration of the mind upon Krsna, or in other words Krsna
consciousness, is the highest form of all yoga. By concentrating one's
mind upon Krsna, one is able to know the Absolute Truth completely, but
not otherwise. Impersonal brahmajyoti or localized Paramatma
realization is not perfect knowledge of the Absolute Truth because it
is partial. Full and scientific knowledge is Krsna, and everything is
revealed to the person in Krsna consciousness. In complete Krsna
consciousness one knows that Krsna is ultimate knowledge beyond any
doubts. Different types of yoga are only steppingstones on the path of
Krsna consciousness. One who takes directly to Krsna consciousness
automatically knows about brahmajyoti and Paramatma in full. By
practice of Krsna consciousness yoga, one can know everything in full--
namely the Absolute Truth, the living entities, the material nature,
and their manifestations with paraphernalia.
One should therefore begin yoga practice as directed in the last verse
of the Sixth Chapter. Concentration of the mind upon Krsna the Supreme
is made possible by prescribed devotional service in nine different
forms, of which sravanam is the first and most important. The Lord
therefore says to Arjuna, tac chrnu, or "Hear from Me." No one can be a
greater authority than Krsna, and therefore by hearing from Him one
receives the greatest opportunity for progress in Krsna consciousness.
One has therefore to learn from Krsna directly or from a pure devotee
of Krsna--and not from a nondevotee upstart, puffed up with academic
education.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam this process of understanding Krsna, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, is described in the
Second Chapter of the First Canto as follows:
srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah
punya-sravana-kirtanah
hrdy antah-stho hy abhadrani
vidhunoti suhrt satam
nasta-prayesv abhadresu
nityam bhagavata-sevaya
bhagavaty uttama-sloke
bhaktir bhavati naisthiki
tada rajas-tamo-bhavah
kama-lobhadayas ca ye
ceta etair anaviddham
sthitam sattve prasidati
evam prasanna-manaso
bhagavad-bhakti-yogatah
bhagavat-tattva-vijnanam
mukta-sangasya jayate
bhidyate hrdaya-granthis
chidyante sarva-samsayah
ksiyante casya karmani
drsta evatmanisvare
"To hear about Krsna from Vedic literatures, or to hear from Him
directly through the Bhagavad-gita, is itself righteous activity. And
for one who hears about Krsna, Lord Krsna who is dwelling in everyone's
heart, acts as a best-wishing friend and purifies the devotee who
constantly engages in hearing of Him. In this way, a devotee naturally
develops his dormant transcendental knowledge. As he hears more about
Krsna from the Bhagavatam and from the devotees, he becomes fixed in
the devotional service of the Lord. By development of devotional
service one becomes freed from the modes of passion and ignorance, and
thus material lusts and avarice are diminished. When these impurities
are wiped away, the candidate remains steady in his position of pure
goodness, becomes enlivened by devotional service and understands the
science of God perfectly. Thus bhakti-yoga severs the hard knot of
material affection and enables one to come at once to the stage of
asamsayam-samagram, understanding of the Supreme Absolute Truth
Personality of Godhead." (Bhag. 1.2.17-21)
Therefore only by hearing from Krsna or from His devotee in Krsna
consciousness can one understand the science of Krsna.
TEXT 2
jnanam te 'ham sa-vijnanam
idam vaksyamy asesatah
yaj jnatva neha bhuyo 'nyaj
jnatavyam avasisyate
SYNONYMS
jnanam--phenomenal knowledge; te--unto you; aham--I; sa--with;
vijnanam--noumenal knowledge; idam--this; vaksyami--shall explain;
asesatah--in full; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--not; iha--in this
world; bhuyah--further; anyat--anything more; jnatavyam--knowable;
avasisyate--remains to be known.
TRANSLATION
I shall now declare unto you in full this knowledge both phenomenal and
noumenal, by knowing which there shall remain nothing further to be
known.
PURPORT
Complete knowledge includes knowledge of the phenomenal world and the
spirit behind it. The source of both of them is transcendental
knowledge. The Lord wants to explain the above-mentioned system of
knowledge because Arjuna is Krsna's confidential devotee and friend. In
the beginning of the Fourth Chapter this explanation was given by the
Lord, and it is again confirmed here: complete knowledge can be
achieved only by the devotee of the Lord directly from the Lord in
disciplic succession. Therefore one should be intelligent enough to
know the source of all knowledge, who is the cause of all causes and
the only object for meditation in all types of yoga practice. When the
cause of all causes becomes known, then everything knowable becomes
known, and nothing remains unknown. The Vedas (Mundaka Upanisad 1.3)
say, kasmin bhagavo vijnate sarvam idam vijnatam bhavati.
TEXT 3
manusyanam sahasresu
kascid yatati siddhaye
yatatam api siddhanam
kascin mam vetti tattvatah
SYNONYMS
manusyanam--of men; sahasresu--out of many thousands; kascit--someone;
yatati--endeavors; siddhaye--for perfection; yatatam--of those so
endeavoring; api--indeed; siddhanam--of those who have achieved
perfection; kascit--someone; mam--Me; vetti--does know; tattvatah--in
fact.
TRANSLATION
Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection, and
of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me in truth.
PURPORT
There are various grades of men, and out of many thousands one may be
sufficiently interested in transcendental realization to try to know
what is the self, what is the body, and what is the Absolute Truth.
Generally mankind is simply engaged in the animal propensities, namely
eating, sleeping, defending and mating, and hardly anyone is interested
in transcendental knowledge. The first six chapters of the Gita are
meant for those who are interested in transcendental knowledge, in
understanding the self, the Superself and the process of realization by
jnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and discrimination of the self from matter.
However, Krsna can only be known by persons who are in Krsna
consciousness. Other transcendentalists may achieve impersonal Brahman
realization, for this is easier than understanding Krsna. Krsna is the
Supreme Person, but at the same time He is beyond the knowledge of
Brahman and Paramatma. The yogis and jnanis are confused in their
attempts to understand Krsna, although the greatest of the
impersonalists, Sripada Sankaracarya, has admitted in his Gita
commentary that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But his
followers do not accept Krsna as such, for it is very difficult to know
Krsna, even though one has transcendental realization of impersonal
Brahman.
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes,
the primeval Lord Govinda. Isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-
vigrahah. anadir adir govindah sarva-karana-karanam. It is very
difficult for the nondevotees to know Him. Although nondevotees declare
that the path of bhakti or devotional service is very easy, they cannot
practice it. If the path of bhakti is so easy, as the nondevotee class
of men proclaim, then why do they take up the difficult path? Actually
the path of bhakti is not easy. The so-called path of bhakti practiced
by unauthorized persons without knowledge of bhakti may be easy, but
when it is practiced factually according to the rules and regulations,
the speculative scholars and philosophers fall away from the path.
Srila Rupa Gosvami writes in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.101):
sruti-smrti-puranadi-
pancaratra-vidhim vina
aikantiki harer bhaktir
utpatayaiva kalpate
"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized Vedic
literatures like the Upanisads, Puranas, Narada-pancaratra, etc., is
simply an unnecessary disturbance in society."
It is not possible for the Brahman-realized impersonalist or the
Paramatma-realized yogi to understand Krsna the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as the son of mother Yasoda or the charioteer of Arjuna. Even
the great demigods are sometimes confused about Krsna (muhyanti yat
surayah). Mam tu veda na kascana: "No one knows Me as I am," the Lord
says. And if one does know Him, then sa mahatma su-durlabhah. "Such a
great soul is very rare." Therefore unless one practices devotional
service to the Lord, he cannot know Krsna as He is (tattvatah), even
though one is a great scholar or philosopher. Only the pure devotees
can know something of the inconceivable transcendental qualities in
Krsna, in the cause of all causes, in His omnipotence and opulence, and
in His wealth, fame, strength, beauty, knowledge and renunciation,
because Krsna is benevolently inclined to His devotees. He is the last
word in Brahman realization, and the devotees alone can realize Him as
He is. Therefore it is said:
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
"No one can understand Krsna as He is by the blunt material senses. But
He reveals Himself to the devotees, being pleased with them for their
transcendental loving service unto Him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu
1.2.234)
TEXT 4
bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh
kham mano buddhir eva ca
ahankara itiyam me
bhinna prakrtir astadha
SYNONYMS
bhumih--earth; apah--water; analah--fire; vayuh--air; kham--ether;
manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; eva--certainly; ca--and; ahankarah-
-false ego; iti--thus; iyam--all these; me--My; bhinna--separated;
prakrtih--energies; astadha--total eight
.
TRANSLATION
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego--all
together these eight constitute My separated material energies.
PURPORT
The science of God analyzes the constitutional position of God and His
diverse energies. Material nature is called prakrti, or the energy of
the Lord in His different purusa incarnations (expansions) as described
in the Satvata-tantra:
visnos tu trini rupani
purusakhyany atho viduh
ekam tu mahatah srastr
dvitiyam tv anda-samsthitam
trtiyam sarva-bhuta-stham
tani jnatva vimucyate
"For material creation, Lord Krsna's plenary expansion assumes three
Visnus. The first one, Maha-Visnu, creates the total material energy,
known as mahat-tattva. The second, Garbhodakasayi Visnu, enters into
all the universes to create diversities in each of them. The third,
Ksirodakasayi Visnu, is diffused as the all-pervading Supersoul in all
the universes and is known as Paramatma, who is present even within the
atoms. Anyone who knows these three Visnus can be liberated from
material entanglement."
This material world is a temporary manifestation of one of the energies
of the Lord. All the activities of the material world are directed by
these three Visnu expansions of Lord Krsna. These purusas are called
incarnations. Generally one who does not know the science of God
(Krsna) assumes that this material world is for the enjoyment of the
living entities and that the living entities are the causes (purusas),
controllers and enjoyers of the material energy. According to Bhagavad-
gita this atheistic conclusion is false. In the verse under discussion
it is stated that Krsna is the original cause of the material
manifestation. Srimad-Bhagavatam also confirms this. The ingredients of
the material manifestation are separated energies of the Lord. Even the
brahmajyoti, which is the ultimate goal of the impersonalists, is a
spiritual energy manifested in the spiritual sky. There are no
spiritual diversities in the brahmajyoti as there are in the
Vaikunthalokas, and the impersonalist accepts this brahmajyoti as the
ultimate eternal goal. The Paramatma manifestation is also a temporary
all-pervasive aspect of the Ksirodakasayi Visnu. The Paramatma
manifestation is not eternal in the spiritual world. Therefore the
factual Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna. He
is the complete energetic person, and He possesses different separated
and internal energies.
In the material energy, the principal manifestations are eight, as
above mentioned. Out of these, the first five manifestations, namely
earth, water, fire, air and sky, are called the five gigantic creations
or the gross creations, within which the five sense objects are
included. They are the manifestations of physical sound, touch, form,
taste and smell. Material science comprises these ten items and nothing
more. But the other three items, namely mind, intelligence and false
ego, are neglected by the materialists. Philosophers who deal with
mental activities are also not perfect in knowledge because they do not
know the ultimate source, Krsna. The false ego--"I am," and "It is
mine," which constitute the basic principle of material existence--
includes ten sense organs for material activities. Intelligence refers
to the total material creation, called the mahat-tattva. Therefore from
the eight separated energies of the Lord are manifest the twenty-four
elements of the material world, which are the subject matter of Sankhya
atheistic philosophy; they are originally offshoots from Krsna's
energies and are separated from Him, but atheistic Sankhya philosophers
with a poor fund of knowledge do not know Krsna as the cause of all
causes. The subject matter for discussion in the Sankhya philosophy is
only the manifestation of the external energy of Krsna, as it is
described in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 5
apareyam itas tv anyam
prakrtim viddhi me param
jiva-bhutam maha-baho
yayedam dharyate jagat
SYNONYMS
apara--inferior; iyam--this; itah--besides this; tu--but; anyam--
another; prakrtim--energy; viddhi--just try to understand; me--My;
param--superior; jiva-bhutam--the living entities; maha-baho--O mighty-
armed one; yaya--by whom; idam--this; dharyate--being utilized or
exploited; jagat--the material world.
TRANSLATION
Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which comprises all the living entities who
are struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe.
PURPORT
Here it is clearly mentioned that living entities belong to the
superior nature (or energy) of the Supreme Lord. The inferior energy is
matter manifested in different elements, namely earth, water, fire,
air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego. Both forms of material
nature, namely gross (earth, etc.) and subtle (mind, etc.), are
products of the inferior energy. The living entities, who are
exploiting these inferior energies for different purposes, are the
superior energy of the Supreme Lord, and it is due to this energy that
the entire material world functions. The cosmic manifestation has no
power to act unless it is moved by the superior energy, the living
entity. Energies are always controlled by the energetic, and therefore
living entities are always controlled by the Lord--they have no
independent existence. They are never equally powerful, as
unintelligent men think. The distinction between the living entities
and the Lord is described in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.30) as follows:
aparimita dhruvas tanu-bhrto yadi sarva-gatas
tarhi na sasyateti niyamo dhruva netaratha
ajani ca yan-mayam tad avimucya niyantr bhavet
samam anujanatam yad amatam mata-dustataya
"O Supreme Eternal! If the embodied living entities were eternal and
all-pervading like You, then they would not be under Your control. But
if the living entities are accepted as minute energies of Your
Lordship, then they are at once subject to Your supreme control.
Therefore real liberation entails surrender by the living entities to
Your control, and that surrender will make them happy. In that
constitutional position only can they be controllers. Therefore, men
with limited knowledge who advocate the monistic theory that God and
the living entities are equal in all respects are actually misleading
themselves and others."
The Supreme Lord Krsna is the only controller, and all living entities
are controlled by Him. These living entities are His superior energy
because the quality of their existence is one and the same with the
Supreme, but they are never equal to the Lord in quantity of power.
While exploiting the gross and subtle inferior energy (matter), the
superior energy (the living entity) forgets his real spiritual mind and
intelligence. This forgetfulness is due to the influence of matter upon
the living entity. But when the living entity becomes free from the
influence of the illusory material energy, he attains the stage called
mukti, or liberation. The false ego, under the influence of material
illusion, thinks, "I am matter, and material acquisitions are mine."
His actual position is realized when he is liberated from all material
ideas, including the conception of his becoming one in all respects
with God. Therefore one may conclude that the Gita confirms the living
entity to be only one of the multi-energies of Krsna; and when this
energy is freed from material contamination, it becomes fully Krsna
conscious, or liberated.
TEXT 6
etad-yonini bhutani
sarvanity upadharaya
aham krtsnasya jagatah
prabhavah pralayas tatha
SYNONYMS
etat--these two natures; yonini--source of birth; bhutani--everything
created; sarvani--all; iti--thus; upadharaya--know; aham--I; krtsnasya-
-all-inclusive; 
jagatah--of 
the 
world; 
prabhavah--source 
of
manifestation; pralayah--annihilation; tatha--as well as.
TRANSLATION
Of all that is material and all that is spiritual in this world, know
for certain that I am both its origin and dissolution.
PURPORT
Everything that exists is a product of matter and spirit. Spirit is the
basic field of creation, and matter is created by spirit. Spirit is not
created at a certain stage of material development. Rather, this
material world is manifested only on the basis of spiritual energy.
This material body is developed because spirit is present within
matter; a child grows gradually to boyhood and then to manhood because
of that superior energy, spirit soul, being present. Similarly, the
entire cosmic manifestation of the gigantic universe is developed
because of the presence of the Supersoul, Visnu. Therefore spirit and
matter, which combine together to manifest this gigantic universal
form, are originally two energies of the Lord, and consequently the
Lord is the original cause of everything. A fragmental part and parcel
of the Lord, namely, the living entity, may by manipulation of material
energy construct a skyscraper, a factory, or city, but he cannot create
matter out of nothing, and he certainly cannot construct a planet or a
universe. The cause of the universe is the Supersoul, Krsna, the
Supreme creator of all individual souls and the original cause of all
causes, as the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) confirms. (Nityo nityanam
cetanas cetananam.)
TEXT 7
mattah parataram nanyat
kincid asti dhananjaya
mayi sarvam idam protam
sutre mani-gana iva
SYNONYMS
mattah--beyond Myself; para-taram--superior; na--not; anyat kincit--
anything else; asti--there is; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; mayi-
-in Me; sarvam--all that be; idam--which we see; protam--strung; sutre-
-on a thread; mani-ganah--pearls; iva--likened.
TRANSLATION
O conqueror of wealth [Arjuna], there is no truth superior to Me.
Everything rests upon Me, as pearls are strung on a thread.
PURPORT
There is a common controversy over whether the Supreme Absolute Truth
is personal or impersonal. As far as Bhagavad-gita is concerned, the
Absolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, and this is
confirmed in every step. In this verse, in particular, it is stressed
that the Absolute Truth is a person. That the Personality of Godhead is
the Supreme Absolute Truth is also the affirmation of the Brahma-
samhita: isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah; that is, the
Supreme Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is Lord Krsna, who is the
primeval Lord, the reservoir of all pleasure, Govinda, and the eternal
form of complete bliss and knowledge. These authorities leave no doubt
that the Absolute Truth is the Supreme Person, the cause of all causes.
The impersonalist, however, argues on the strength of the Vedic version
given in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.10): tato yad uttarataram tad
arupam anamayam. ya etad vidur amrtas te bhavanti athetare duhkham
evapiyanti. "In the material world Brahma, the primeval living entity
within the universe, is understood to be the supreme amongst the
demigods, human beings and lower animals. But beyond Brahma there is
the Transcendence who has no material form and is free from all
material contaminations. Anyone who can know Him also becomes
transcendental, but those who do not know Him suffer the miseries of
the material world."
The impersonalist puts more stress on the word arupam. But this arupam
is not impersonal. It indicates the transcendental form of eternity,
bliss and knowledge as described in the Brahma-samhita quoted above.
Other verses in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.8-9) substantiate this as
follows:
vedaham etam purusam mahantam
aditya-varnam tamasah parastat
tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti
nanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya
yasmat param naparam asti kincid
yasman naniyo no jyayo 'sti kincit
vrksa iva stabdho divi tisthaty ekas
tenedam purnam purusena sarvam
"I know that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is transcendental to
all material conceptions of darkness. Only he who knows Him can
transcend the bonds of birth and death. There is no way for liberation
other than this knowledge of that Supreme Person.
"There is no truth superior to that Supreme Person because He is the
supermost. He is smaller than the smallest, and He is greater than the
greatest. He is situated as a silent tree, and He illumines the
transcendental sky, and as a tree spreads its roots, He spreads His
extensive energies."
From these verses one concludes that the Supreme Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is all-pervading by His multi-
energies, both material and spiritual.
TEXT 8
raso 'ham apsu kaunteya
prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh
pranavah sarva-vedesu
sabdah khe paurusam nrsu
SYNONYMS
rasah--taste; aham--I; apsu--in water; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; prabha
asmi--I am the light; sasi-suryayoh--in the sun and the moon; pranavah-
-the letters a-u-m; sarva--in all; vedesu--in the Vedas; sabdah--sound
vibration; khe--in the ether; paurusam--ability; nrsu--in man.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti [Arjuna], I am the taste of water, the light of the sun
and the moon, the syllable om in the Vedic mantras; I am the sound in
ether and ability in man.
PURPORT
This verse explains how the Lord is all-pervasive by His diverse
material and spiritual energies. The Supreme Lord can be preliminarily
perceived by His different energies, and in this way He is realized
impersonally. As the demigod in the sun is a person and is perceived by
his all-pervading energy, the sunshine, similarly the Lord, although in
His eternal abode, is perceived by His all-pervading, diffusive
energies. The taste of water is the active principle of water. No one
likes to drink sea water because the pure taste of water is mixed with
salt. Attraction for water depends on the purity of the taste, and this
pure taste is one of the energies of the Lord. The impersonalist
perceives the presence of the Lord in water by its taste, and the
personalist also glorifies the Lord for His kindly supplying water to
quench man's thirst. That is the way of perceiving the Supreme.
Practically speaking, there is no conflict between personalism and
impersonalism. One who knows God knows that the impersonal conception
and personal conception are simultaneously present in everything and
that there is no contradiction. Therefore Lord Caitanya established His
sublime doctrine: acintya bheda-and-abheda-tattva--simultaneously one
and different.
The light of the sun and the moon is also originally emanating from the
brahmajyoti, which is the impersonal effulgence of the Lord. Similarly
pranava or the omkara transcendental sound in the beginning of every
Vedic hymn to address the Supreme Lord also emanates from Him. Because
the impersonalists are very much afraid of addressing the Supreme Lord
Krsna by His innumerable names, they prefer to vibrate the
transcendental sound omkara. But they do not realize that omkara is the
sound representation of Krsna. The jurisdiction of Krsna consciousness
extends everywhere, and one who knows Krsna consciousness is blessed.
Those who do not know Krsna are in illusion, and so knowledge of Krsna
is liberation, and ignorance of Him is bondage.
TEXT 9
punyo gandhah prthivyam ca
tejas casmi vibhavasau
jivanam sarva-bhutesu
tapas casmi tapasvisu
SYNONYMS
punyah--original; gandhah--fragrance; prthivyam--in the earth; ca--
also; tejah--temperature; ca--also; asmi--I am; vibhavasau--in the
fire; jivanam--life; sarva--all; bhutesu--living entities; tapah--
penance; ca--also; asmi--I am; tapasvisu--in those who practice
penance.
TRANSLATION
I am the original fragrance of the earth, and I am the heat in fire. I
am the life of all that lives, and I am the penances of all ascetics.
PURPORT
Punya means that which is not decomposed; punya is original. Everything
in the material world has a certain flavor or fragrance, as the flavor
and fragrance in a flower, or in the earth, in water, in fire, in air,
etc. The uncontaminated flavor, the original flavor, which permeates
everything, is Krsna. Similarly, everything has a particular original
taste, and this taste can be changed by the mixture of chemicals. So
everything original has some smell, some fragrance, and some taste.
Vibhava means fire. Without fire we cannot run factories, we cannot
cook, etc., and that fire is Krsna. The heat in the fire is Krsna.
According to Vedic medicine, indigestion is due to a low temperature in
the belly. So even for digestion fire is needed. In Krsna consciousness
we become aware that earth, water, fire, air and every active
principle, all chemicals and all material elements are due to Krsna.
The duration of man's life is also due to Krsna. Therefore by the grace
of Krsna, man can prolong his life or diminish it. So Krsna
consciousness is active in every sphere.
TEXT 10
bijam mam sarva-bhutanam
viddhi partha sanatanam
buddhir buddhimatam asmi
tejas tejasvinam aham
SYNONYMS
bijam--the seed; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities;
viddhi--try to understand; partha--O son of Prtha; sanatanam--original,
eternal; buddhih--intelligence; buddhi-matam--of the intelligent; asmi-
-I am; tejah--prowess; tejasvinam--of the powerful; aham--I am.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prtha, know that I am the original seed of all existences, the
intelligence of the intelligent, and the prowess of all powerful men.
PURPORT
Bijam means seed; Krsna is the seed of everything. In contact with
material nature, the seed fructifies into various living entities,
movable and inert. Birds, beasts, men and many other living creatures
are moving living entities; trees and plants, however, are inert--they
cannot move, but only stand. Every entity is contained within the scope
of 8,400,000 species of life; some of them are moving and some of them
are inert. In all cases, however, the seed of their life is Krsna. As
stated in Vedic literature, Brahman, or the Supreme Absolute Truth, is
that from which everything is emanating. Krsna is Parabrahman, the
Supreme Spirit. Brahman is impersonal and Parabrahman is personal.
Impersonal Brahman is situated in the personal aspect--that is stated
in Bhagavad-gita. Therefore, originally, Krsna is the source of
everything. He is the root. As the root of a tree maintains the whole
tree, Krsna, being the original root of all things, maintains
everything in this material manifestation. This is also confirmed in
the Vedic literature. Yato va imani bhutani jayante. "The Supreme
Absolute Truth is that from which everything is born." He is the prime
eternal among all eternals. He is the supreme living entity of all
living entities, and He alone is maintaining all life. Krsna also says
that He is the root of all intelligence. Unless a person is intelligent
he cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXT 11
balam balavatam caham
kama-raga-vivarjitam
dharmaviruddho bhutesu
kamo 'smi bharatarsabha
SYNONYMS
balam--strength; bala-vatam--of the strong; ca--and; aham--I am; kama--
passion; raga--attachment; vivarjitam--devoid of; dharma-aviruddhah--
not against the religious principles; bhutesu--in all beings; kamah--
sex life; asmi--I am; bharata-rsabha--O lord of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATION
I am the strength of the strong, devoid of passion and desire. I am sex
life which is not contrary to religious principles, O lord of the
Bharatas [Arjuna].
PURPORT
The strong man's strength should be applied to protect the weak, not
for personal aggression. Similarly, sex life, according to religious
principles (dharma), should be for the propagation of children, not
otherwise. The responsibility of parents is then to make their
offspring Krsna conscious.
TEXT 12
ye caiva sattvika bhava
rajasas tamasas ca ye
matta eveti tan viddhi
na tv aham tesu te mayi
SYNONYMS
ye--all those; ca--and; eva--certainly; sattvikah--in goodness; bhavah-
-states of being; rajasah--mode of passion; tamasah--mode of ignorance;
ca--also; ye--although; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; iti--thus;
tan--those; viddhi--try to know; na--not; tu--but; aham--I; tesu--in
those; te--they; mayi--unto Me.
TRANSLATION
All states of being--be they of goodness, passion or ignorance--are
manifested by My energy. I am, in one sense, everything--but I am
independent. I am not under the modes of this material nature.
PURPORT
All material activities in the world are being conducted under the
three modes of material nature. Although these material modes of nature
are emanations from the Supreme Lord, Krsna, He is not subject to them.
For instance, under the state laws one may be punished, but the king,
the lawmaker, is not subject to that law. Similarly, all the modes of
material nature--goodness, passion and ignorance--are emanations from
the Supreme Lord Krsna, but Krsna is not subject to material nature.
Therefore He is nirguna, which means that these gunas, or modes,
although issuing from Him, do not affect Him. That is one of the
special characteristics of Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 13
tribhir guna-mayair bhavair
ebhih sarvam idam jagat
mohitam nabhijanati
mam ebhyah param avyayam
SYNONYMS
tribhih--three; guna-mayaih--by the three gunas; bhavaih--state of
being; ebhih--all these; sarvam--the whole world; idam--in this world;
jagat--universe; mohitam--deluded; na abhijanati--do not know; mam--Me;
ebhyah--above these; param--the Supreme; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
Deluded by the three modes [goodness, passion and ignorance], the whole
world does not know Me, who am above the modes and inexhaustible.
PURPORT
The whole world is enchanted by three modes of material nature. Those
who are bewildered by these three modes cannot understand that
transcendental to this material nature is the Supreme Lord, Krsna. In
this material world everyone is under the influence of these three
gunas and is thus bewildered.
By nature living entities have particular types of body and particular
types of psychic and biological activities accordingly. There are four
classes of men functioning in the three modes of nature. Those who are
purely in the mode of goodness are called brahmanas. Those who are
purely in the mode of passion are called ksatriyas. Those who are in
the modes of both passion and ignorance are called vaisyas. Those who
are completely in ignorance are called sudras. And those who are less
than that are animals or animal life. However, these designations are
not permanent. I may either be a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya or
whatever--in any case, this life is temporary. But although life is
temporary and we do not know what we are going to be in the next life,
still, by the spell of this illusory energy, we consider ourselves in
the light of this bodily conception of life, and we thus think that we
are American, Indian, Russian or brahmana, Hindu, Muslim, etc. And if
we become entangled with the modes of material nature, then we forget
the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is behind all these modes. So
Lord Krsna says that men, deluded by these three modes of nature, do
not understand that behind the background is the Supreme Godhead.
There are many different kinds of living entities--human beings,
demigods, animals, etc.--and each and every one of them is under the
influence of material nature, and all of them have forgotten the
transcendent Personality of Godhead. Those who are in the modes of
passion and ignorance, and even those who are in the mode of goodness,
cannot go beyond the impersonal Brahman conception of the Absolute
Truth. They are bewildered before the Supreme Lord in His personal
feature, which possesses all beauty, opulence, knowledge, strength,
fame and renunciation. When even those who are in goodness cannot
understand, what hope is there for those in passion and ignorance?
Krsna consciousness is transcendental to all these three modes of
material nature, and those who are truly established in Krsna
consciousness are actually liberated.
TEXT 14
daivi hy esa guna-mayi
mama maya duratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante
mayam etam taranti te
SYNONYMS
daivi--transcendental; hi--certainly; esa--this; guna-mayi--consisting
of the three modes of material nature; mama--My; maya--energy;
duratyaya--very difficult to overcome; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
ye--those; prapadyante--surrender; mayam etam--this illusory energy;
taranti--overcome; te--they.
TRANSLATION
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto
Me can easily cross beyond it.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has innumerable energies, and all
these energies are divine. Although the living entities are part of His
energies and are therefore divine, due to contact with material energy,
their original superior power is covered. Being thus covered by
material energy, one cannot possibly overcome its influence. As
previously stated, both the material and spiritual natures, being
emanations from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are eternal. The
living entities belong to the eternal superior nature of the Lord, but
due to contamination by the inferior nature, matter, their illusion is
also eternal. The conditioned soul is therefore called nitya-baddha, or
eternally conditioned. No one can trace out the history of his becoming
conditioned at a certain date in material history. Consequently, his
release from the clutches of material nature is very difficult, even
though that material nature is an inferior energy, because material
energy is ultimately conducted by the supreme will, which the living
entity cannot overcome. Inferior material nature is defined herein as
divine nature due to its divine connection and movement by the divine
will. Being conducted by divine will, material nature, although
inferior, acts so wonderfully in the construction and destruction of
the cosmic manifestation. The Vedas confirm this as follows: mayam tu
prakrtim vidyan mayinam tu mahesvaram. "Although maya [illusion] is
false or temporary, the background of maya is the supreme magician, the
Personality of Godhead, who is Mahesvara, the supreme controller."
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 4.10)
Another meaning of guna is rope; it is to be understood that the
conditioned soul is tightly tied by the ropes of illusion. A man bound
by the hands and feet cannot free himself--he must be helped by a
person who is unbound. Because the bound cannot help the bound, the
rescuer must be liberated. Therefore, only Lord Krsna, or His bona fide
representative the spiritual master, can release the conditioned soul.
Without such superior help, one cannot be freed from the bondage of
material nature. Devotional service, or Krsna consciousness, can help
one gain such release. Krsna, being the Lord of illusory energy, can
order this insurmountable energy to release the conditioned soul. He
orders this release out of His causeless mercy on the surrendered soul
and out of His paternal affection for the living entity, who is
originally a beloved son of the Lord. Therefore surrender unto the
lotus feet of the Lord is the only means to get free from the clutches
of the stringent material nature.
The words mam eva are also significant. Mam means unto Krsna (Visnu)
only, and not Brahma or Siva. Although Brahma and Siva are greatly
elevated and are almost on the level of Visnu, it is not possible for
such incarnations of rajo-guna (passion) and tamo-guna (ignorance) to
release the conditioned soul from the clutches of maya. In other words,
both Brahma and Siva are also under the influence of maya. Only Visnu
is the master of maya; therefore He alone can give release to the
conditioned soul. The Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) confirm this in
the phrase tam eva viditva. or "Freedom is possible only by
understanding Krsna." Even Lord Siva affirms that liberation can be
achieved only by the mercy of Visnu. Lord Siva says, mukti-pradata
sarvesam visnur eva na samsayah: "There is no doubt that Visnu is the
deliverer of liberation for everyone."
TEXT 15
na mam duskrtino mudhah
prapadyante naradhamah
mayayapahrta-jnana
asuram bhavam asritah
SYNONYMS
na--not; mam--unto Me; duskrtinah--miscreants; mudhah--foolish;
prapadyante--surrender; nara-adhamah--lowest among mankind; mayaya--by
the illusory energy; apahrta--stolen by illusion; jnanah--knowledge;
asuram--demonic; bhavam--nature; asritah--accepting.
TRANSLATION
Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whose
knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic
nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me.
PURPORT
It is said in Bhagavad-gita that simply by surrendering oneself unto
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality Krsna, one can surmount the
stringent laws of material nature. At this point a question arises: How
is 
it 
that 
educated 
philosophers, 
scientists, 
businessmen,
administrators and all the leaders of ordinary men do not surrender to
the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, the all-powerful Personality of Godhead?
Mukti, or liberation from the laws of material nature, is sought by the
leaders of mankind in different ways and with great plans and
perseverance for a great many years and births. But if that liberation
is possible by simply surrendering unto the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, then why don't these intelligent and hard-
working leaders adopt this simple method?
The Gita answers this question very frankly. Those really learned
leaders of society like Brahma, Siva, Kapila, the Kumaras, Manu, Vyasa,
Devala, Asita, Janaka, Prahlada, Bali, and later on Madhvacarya,
Ramanujacarya, Sri Caitanya and many others--who are faithful
philosophers, politicians, educators, scientists, etc.--surrender to
the lotus feet of the Supreme Person, the all-powerful authority. Those
who 
are 
not 
actually 
philosophers, 
scientists, 
educators,
administrators, etc., but who pose themselves as such for material
gain, do not accept the plan or path of the Supreme Lord. They have no
idea of God; they simply manufacture their own worldly plans and
consequently complicate the problems of material existence in their
vain attempts to solve them. Because material energy (nature) is so
powerful, it can resist the unauthorized plans of the atheists and
baffle the knowledge of "planning commissions."
The atheistic plan-makers are described herein by the word duskrtinah,
or "miscreants." Krtina means one who has performed meritorious work.
The atheist planmaker is sometimes very intelligent and meritorious
also, because any gigantic plan, good or bad, must take intelligence to
execute. But because the atheist's brain is improperly utilized in
opposing the plan of the Supreme Lord, the atheistic planmaker is
called duskrtina, which indicates that his intelligence and efforts are
misdirected.
In the Gita it is clearly mentioned that material energy works fully
under the direction of the Supreme Lord. It has no independent
authority. It works as the shadow moves, in accordance with the
movements of the object. But still material energy is very powerful,
and the atheist, due to his godless temperament, cannot know how it
works; nor can he know the plan of the Supreme Lord. Under illusion and
the modes of passion and ignorance, all his plans are baffled, as in
the case of Hiranyakasipu and Ravana, whose plans were smashed to dust
although they were both materially learned as scientists, philosophers,
administrators and educators. These duskrtinas, or miscreants, are of
four different patterns, as outlined below.
(1) The mudhas are those who are grossly foolish, like hard-working
beasts of burden. They want to enjoy the fruits of their labor by
themselves, and so do not want to part with them for the Supreme. The
typical example of the beast of burden is the ass. This humble beast is
made to work very hard by his master. The ass does not really know for
whom he works so hard day and night. He remains satisfied by filling
his stomach with a bundle of grass, sleeping for a while under fear of
being beaten by his master, and satisfying his sex appetite at the risk
of being repeatedly kicked by the opposite party. The ass sings poetry
and philosophy sometimes, but this braying only disturbs others. This
is the position of the foolish fruitive worker who does not know for
whom he should work. He does not know that karma (action) is meant for
yajna (sacrifice).
Most often, those who work very hard day and night to clear the burden
of self-created duties say that they have no time to hear of the
immortality of the living being. To such mudhas, material gains, which
are destructible, are life's all in all--despite the fact that the
mudhas enjoy only a very small fraction of the fruit of labor.
Sometimes they spend sleepless days and nights for fruitive gain, and
although they may have ulcers or indigestion, they are satisfied with
practically no food; they are simply absorbed in working hard day and
night for the benefit of illusory masters. Ignorant of their real
master, the foolish workers waste their valuable time serving mammon.
Unfortunately, they never surrender to the supreme master of all
masters, nor do they take time to hear of Him from the proper sources.
The swine who eat the stool do not care to accept sweetmeats made of
sugar and ghee. Similarly, the foolish worker will untiringly continue
to hear of the sense-enjoyable tidings of the flickering mundane force
that moves the material world.
(2) Another class of duskrti, or miscreant, is called the naradhama, or
the lowest of mankind. Nara means human being, and adhama means the
lowest. Out of the 8,400,000 different species of living beings, there
are 400,000 human species. Out of these there are numerous lower forms
of human life that are mostly uncivilized. The civilized human beings
are those who have regulative principles of social, political and
religious life. Those who are socially and politically developed, but
who have no religious principles, must be considered naradhamas. Nor is
religion without God religion, because the purpose of following
religious principles is to know the Supreme Truth and man's relation
with Him. In the Gita the Personality of Godhead clearly states that
there is no authority above Him and that He is the Supreme Truth. The
civilized form of human life is meant for man's reviving the lost
consciousness of his eternal relation with the Supreme Truth, the
Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna, who is all-powerful. Whoever loses
this chance is classified as a naradhama. We get information from
revealed scriptures that when the baby is in the mother's womb (an
extremely uncomfortable situation) he prays to God for deliverance and
promises to worship Him alone as soon as he gets out. To pray to God
when he is in difficulty is a natural instinct in every living being
because he is eternally related with God. But after his deliverance,
the child forgets the difficulties of birth and forgets his deliverer
also, being influenced by maya, the illusory energy.
It is the duty of the guardians of children to revive the divine
consciousness dormant in them. The ten processes of reformatory
ceremonies, as enjoined in the Manu-smrti, which is the guide to
religious principles, are meant for reviving God consciousness in the
system of varnasrama. However, no process is strictly followed now in
any part of the world, and therefore 99.9 percent of the population is
naradhama.
When the whole population becomes naradhama, naturally all their so-
called education is made null and void by the all-powerful energy of
physical nature. According to the standard of the Gita, a learned man
is he who sees on equal terms the learned brahmana, the dog, the cow,
the elephant and the dog-eater. That is the vision of a true devotee.
Sri Nityananda Prabhu, who is the incarnation of Godhead as divine
master, delivered the typical naradhamas, the brothers Jagai and
Madhai, and showed how the mercy of a real devotee is bestowed upon the
lowest of mankind. So the naradhama who is condemned by the Personality
of Godhead can again revive his spiritual consciousness only by the
mercy of a devotee.
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in propagating the bhagavata-dharma or
activities of the devotees, has recommended that people submissively
hear the message of the Personality of Godhead. The essence of this
message is Bhagavad-gita. The lowest amongst human beings can be
delivered by this submissive hearing process only, but unfortunately
they even deny giving an aural reception to these messages, and what to
speak of surrendering to the will of the Supreme Lord? Naradhamas, or
the lowest of mankind, will fully neglect the prime duty of the human
being.
(3) The next class of duskrti is called mayayapahrta-jnanah, or those
persons whose erudite knowledge has been nullified by the influence of
illusory material energy. They are mostly very learned fellows--great
philosophers, poets, literati, scientists, etc.--but the illusory
energy misguides them, and therefore they disobey the Supreme Lord.
There are a great number of mayayapahrta-jnanah at the present moment,
even amongst the scholars of the Gita. In the Gita, in plain and simple
language, it is stated that Sri Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. There is none equal to or greater than Him. He is mentioned as
the father of Brahma, the original father of all human beings. In fact,
Sri Krsna is said to be not only the father of Brahma but also the
father of all species of life. He is the root of the impersonal Brahman
and Paramatma; the Supersoul in every entity is His plenary portion. He
is the fountainhead of everything and everyone is advised to surrender
unto His lotus feet. Despite all these clear statements, the
mayayapahrta-jnanah deride the personality of the Supreme Lord and
consider Him merely another human being. They do not know that the
blessed form of human life is designed after the eternal and
transcendental feature of the Supreme Lord.
All the unauthorized interpretations of the Gita by the class of
mayayapahrta-jnanah, outside the purview of the parampara system, are
so many stumbling blocks on the path of spiritual understanding. The
deluded interpreters do not surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna,
nor do they teach others to follow this principle.
(4) The last class of duskrti is called asuram bhavam asritah, or those
of demonic principles. This class is openly atheistic. Some of them
argue that the Supreme Lord can never descend upon this material world,
but they are unable to give any tangible reasons as to why not. There
are others who make Him subordinate to the impersonal feature, although
the opposite is declared in the Gita. Envious of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the atheist will present a number of illicit
incarnations manufactured in the factory of his brain. Such persons
whose very principle of life is to decry the Personality of Godhead
cannot surrender unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna.
Sri Yamunacarya Albandaru of South India said, "O my Lord! You are
unknowable to persons involved with atheistic principles, despite Your
uncommon qualities, features, and activities and despite Your
personality being confirmed by all the revealed scriptures in the
quality of goodness, and despite Your being acknowledged by the famous
authorities renowned for their depth of knowledge in the transcendental
science and situated in the godly qualities."
Therefore, (1) grossly foolish persons, (2) the lowest of mankind, (3)
the deluded speculators, and (4) the professed atheists, as above
mentioned, never surrender unto the lotus feet of the Personality of
Godhead in spite of all scriptural and authoritative advice.
TEXT 16
catur-vidha bhajante mam
janah sukrtino 'rjuna
arto jijnasur artharthi
jnani ca bharatarsabha
SYNONYMS
catuh-vidhah--four kinds of; bhajante--render services; mam--unto Me;
janah--persons; su-krtinah--those who are pious; arjuna--O Arjuna;
artah--the distressed; jijnasuh--the inquisitive; artha-arthi--one who
desires material gain; jnani--one who knows things as they are; ca--
also; bharata-rsabha--O great one amongst the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O best among the Bharatas [Arjuna], four kinds of pious men render
devotional service unto Me--the distressed, the desirer of wealth, the
inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of the Absolute.
PURPORT
Unlike the miscreants, these are adherents of the regulative principles
of the scriptures, and they are called sukrtinah, or those who obey the
rules and regulations of scriptures, the moral and social laws, and
are, more or less, devoted to the Supreme Lord. Out of these there are
four classes of men--those who are sometimes distressed, those who are
in need of money, those who are sometimes inquisitive, and those who
are sometimes searching after knowledge of the Absolute Truth. These
persons come to the Supreme Lord for devotional service under different
conditions. These are not pure devotees because they have some
aspiration to fulfill in exchange for devotional service. Pure
devotional service is without aspiration and without desire for
material profit. The Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) defines pure
devotion thus:
anyabhilasita-sunyam
jnana-karmady-anavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-
silanam bhaktir uttama
"One should render transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord
Krsna favorably and without desire for material profit or gain through
fruitive activities or philosophical speculation. That is called pure
devotional service."
When these four kinds of persons come to the Supreme Lord for
devotional service and are completely purified by the association of a
pure devotee, they also become pure devotees. As far as the miscreants
are concerned, for them devotional service is very difficult because
their lives are selfish, irregular and without spiritual goals. But
even some of them, by chance, when they come in contact with a pure
devotee, also become pure devotees.
Those who are always busy with fruitive activities come to the Lord in
material distress and at that time associate with pure devotees and
become, in their distress, devotees of the Lord. Those who are simply
frustrated also come sometimes to associate with the pure devotees and
become inquisitive to know about God. Similarly, when the dry
philosophers are frustrated in every field of knowledge, they sometimes
want to learn of God, and they come to the Supreme Lord to render
devotional service and thus transcend knowledge of the impersonal
Brahman and the localized Paramatma and come to the personal conception
of Godhead by the grace of the Supreme Lord or His pure devotee. On the
whole, when the distressed, the inquisitive, the seekers of knowledge,
and those who are in need of money are free from all material desires,
and when they fully understand that material remuneration has nothing
to do with spiritual improvement, they become pure devotees. As long as
such a purified stage is not attained, devotees in transcendental
service to the Lord are tainted with fruitive activities, and they
search after mundane knowledge, etc. So one has to transcend all this
before one can come to the stage of pure devotional service.
TEXT 17
tesam jnani nitya-yukta
eka-bhaktir visisyate
priyo hi jnanino 'tyartham
aham sa ca mama priyah
SYNONYMS
tesam--out of them; jnani--one in full knowledge; nitya-yuktah--always
engaged; eka--only one; bhaktih--in devotional service; visisyate--
especially; priyah--very dear; hi--certainly; jnaninah--person in
knowledge; atyartham--highly; aham--I am; sah--he; ca--also; mama--
Mine; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATION
Of these, the wise one who is in full knowledge in union with Me
through pure devotional service is the best. For I am very dear to him,
and he is dear to Me.
PURPORT
Free from all contaminations of material desires, the distressed, the
inquisitive, the penniless, and the seeker after supreme knowledge can
all become pure devotees. But out of them, he who is in knowledge of
the Absolute Truth and free from all material desires becomes a really
pure devotee of the Lord. And of the four orders, the devotee who is in
full knowledge and is at the same time engaged in devotional service
is, the Lord says, the best. By searching after knowledge one realizes
that his self is different from his material body, and when further
advanced he comes to the knowledge of impersonal Brahman and Paramatma.
When one is fully purified, he realizes that his constitutional
position is to be the eternal servant of God. So by association with
pure devotees, the inquisitive, the distressed, the seeker after
material amelioration and the man in knowledge all become themselves
pure. But in the preparatory stage, the man who is in full knowledge of
the Supreme Lord and is at the same time executing devotional service
is very dear to the Lord. He who is situated in pure knowledge of the
transcendence of the Supreme Personality of God is so protected in
devotional service that material contamination cannot touch him.
TEXT 18
udarah sarva evaite
jnani tv atmaiva me matam
asthitah sa hi yuktatma
mam evanuttamam gatim
SYNONYMS
udarah--magnanimous; sarve--all; eva--certainly; ete--these; jnani--one
who is in knowledge; tu--but; atma eva--just like Myself; me--My;
matam--opinion; asthitah--situated; sah--he; hi--certainly; yukta-atma-
-engaged in devotional service; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
anuttamam--the highest goal; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
All these devotees are undoubtedly magnanimous souls, but he who is
situated in knowledge of Me I consider verily to dwell in Me. Being
engaged in My transcendental service, he attains Me.
PURPORT
It is not that other devotees who are less complete in knowledge are
not dear to the Lord. The Lord says that all are magnanimous because
anyone who comes to the Lord for any purpose is called a mahatma or
great soul. The devotees who want some benefit out of devotional
service are accepted by the Lord because there is an exchange of
affection. Out of affection they ask the Lord for some material
benefit, and when they get it they become so satisfied that they also
advance in devotional service. But the devotee in full knowledge is
considered to be very dear to the Lord because his only purpose is to
serve the Supreme Lord with love and devotion. Such a devotee cannot
live a second without contacting or serving the Supreme Lord.
Similarly, the Supreme Lord is very fond of His devotee and cannot be
separated from him.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.68), the Lord says:
sadhavo hrdayam mahyam
sadhunam hrdayam tv aham
mad-anyat te na jananti
naham tebhyo manag api
"The devotees are always in My heart, and I am always in the hearts of
the devotees. The devotee does not know anything beyond Me, and I also
cannot forget the devotee. There is a very intimate relationship
between Me and the pure devotees. Pure devotees in full knowledge are
never out of spiritual touch, and therefore they are very much dear to
Me."
TEXT 19
bahunam janmanam ante
jnanavan mam prapadyate
vasudevah sarvam iti
sa mahatma su-durlabhah
SYNONYMS
bahunam--many; janmanam--births; ante--after; jnana-van--he possessing
knowledge; mam--unto Me; prapadyate--surrenders; vasudevah--cause of
all causes; sarvam--all; iti--thus; sah--such; maha-atma--great soul;
su-durlabhah--very rare.
TRANSLATION
After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge
surrenders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all
that is. Such a great soul is very rare.
PURPORT
The living entity, while executing devotional service or transcendental
rituals after many, many births, may actually become situated in
transcendental pure knowledge that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is the ultimate goal of spiritual realization. In the beginning of
spiritual realization, while one is trying to give up one's attachment
to materialism, there is some leaning towards impersonalism, but when
one is further advanced he can understand that there are activities in
the spiritual life and that these activities constitute devotional
service. Realizing this, he becomes attached to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and surrenders to Him. At such a time one can understand
that Lord Sri Krsna's mercy is everything, that He is the cause of all
causes and that this material manifestation is not independent from
Him. He realizes the material world to be a perverted reflection of
spiritual variegatedness and realizes that in everything there is a
relationship with the Supreme Lord Krsna. Thus he thinks of everything
in relation to Vasudeva, or Sri Krsna. Such a universal vision of
Vasudeva precipitates one's full surrender to the Supreme Lord Sri
Krsna as the highest goal. Such surrendered great souls are very rare.
This verse is very nicely explained in the Third Chapter (verses 14 and
15) of the Svetasvatara Upanisad: "In this body there are powers of
speaking, of seeing, of hearing, of mental activities, etc. But these
are not important if not related to the Supreme Lord and because
Vasudeva is all-pervading and everything is Vasudeva, the devotee
surrenders in full knowledge (cf. Bhagavad-gita 7.17 and 11.40).
TEXT 20
kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatah
tam tam niyamam asthaya
prakrtya niyatah svaya
SYNONYMS
kamaih--by desires; taih--by those; taih--by those; hrta--distorted;
jnanah--knowledge; prapadyante--surrender; anya--other; devatah--
demigods; tam--that; tam--that; niyamam--rules; asthaya--following;
prakrtya--by nature; niyatah--controlled; svaya--by their own.
TRANSLATION
Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worship
according to their own natures.
PURPORT
Those who are freed from all material contaminations surrender unto the
Supreme Lord and engage in His devotional service. As long as the
material contamination is not completely washed off, they are by nature
nondevotees. But even those who have material desires and who resort to
the Supreme Lord are not so much attracted by external nature; because
of approaching the right goal, they soon become free from all material
lust. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is recommended that whether one is
free from all material desires, or is full of material desires, or
desires liberation from material contamination, or is a pure devotee
and has no desire for material sense gratification, he should in all
cases surrender to Vasudeva and worship Him.
It is said in the Bhagavatam that less intelligent people who have lost
their spiritual sense take shelter of demigods for immediate
fulfillment of material desires. Generally, such people do not go to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because they are in particular
modes of nature (ignorance and passion) and therefore worship various
demigods. Following the rules and regulations of worship, they are
satisfied. The worshipers of demigods are motivated by small desires
and do not know how to reach the supreme goal, but a devotee of the
Supreme Lord is not misguided. Because in Vedic literature there are
recommendations for worshiping different gods for different purposes
(e.g., a diseased man is recommended to worship the sun), those who are
not devotees of the Lord think that for certain purposes demigods are
better than the Supreme Lord. But a pure devotee knows that the Supreme
Lord Krsna is the master of all. In the Caitanya-caritamrta (Adi 5.142)
it is said, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya: only the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is master, and all others are servants.
Therefore a pure devotee never goes to demigods for satisfaction of his
material needs. He depends on the Supreme Lord. And the pure devotee is
satisfied with whatever He gives.
TEXT 21
yo yo yam yam tanum bhaktah
sraddhayarcitum icchati
tasya tasyacalam sraddham
tam eva vidadhamy aham
SYNONYMS
yah--that; yah--that; yam--which; yam--which; tanum--form of the
demigods; bhaktah--devotee; sraddhaya--with faith; arcitum--to worship;
icchati--desires; tasya--of that; tasya--of that; acalam--steady;
sraddham--faith; tam--him; eva--surely; vidadhami--give; aham--I.
TRANSLATION
I am in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. As soon as one desires to
worship the demigods, I make his faith steady so that he can devote
himself to some particular deity.
PURPORT
God has given independence to everyone; therefore, if a person desires
to have material enjoyment and wants very sincerely to have such
facilities from the material demigods, the Supreme Lord, as Supersoul
in everyone's heart, understands and gives facilities to such persons.
As the supreme father of all living entities, He does not interfere
with their independence, but gives all facilities so that they can
fulfill their material desires. Some may ask why the all-powerful God
gives facilities to the living entities for enjoying this material
world and so lets them fall into the trap of the illusory energy. The
answer is that if the Supreme Lord as Supersoul does not give such
facilities, then there is no meaning to independence. Therefore He
gives everyone full independence--whatever one likes--but His ultimate
instruction we find in the Bhagavad-gita: man should give up all other
engagements and fully surrender unto Him. That will make man happy.
Both the living entity and the demigods are subordinate to the will of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the living entity cannot
worship the demigod by his own desire, nor can the demigod bestow any
benediction without the supreme will. As it is said, not a blade of
grass moves without the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Generally, persons who are distressed in the material world go to the
demigods, as they are advised in the Vedic literature. A person wanting
some particular thing may worship such and such a demigod. For example,
a diseased person is recommended to worship the sun-god; a person
wanting education may worship the goddess of learning, Sarasvati; and a
person wanting a beautiful wife may worship the goddess Uma, the wife
of Lord Siva. In this way there are recommendations in the sastras
(Vedic scriptures) for different modes of worship of different
demigods. And because a particular living entity wants to enjoy a
particular material facility, the Lord inspires him with a strong
desire to achieve that benediction from that particular demigod, and so
he successfully receives the benediction. The particular mode of the
devotional attitude of the living entity toward a particular type of
demigod is also arranged by the Supreme Lord. The demigods cannot
infuse the living entities with such an affinity, but because He is the
Supreme Lord or the Supersoul who is present in the hearts of all
living entities, Krsna gives impetus to man to worship certain
demigods. The demigods are actually different parts of the universal
body of the Supreme Lord; therefore they have no independence. In the
Vedic literature it is stated: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead as
Supersoul is also present within the heart of the demigod; therefore He
arranges through the demigod to fulfill the desire of the living
entity. But both the demigod and the living entity are dependent on the
supreme will. They are not independent."
TEXT 22
sa taya sraddhaya yuktas
tasyaradhanam ihate
labhate ca tatah kaman
mayaiva vihitan hi tan
SYNONYMS
sah--he; taya--with that; sraddhaya--with faith; yuktah--endowed;
tasya--his; aradhanam--worship; ihate--seeks; labhate--obtains; ca--
and; tatah--from which; kaman--desires; maya--by Me; eva--alone;
vihitan--regulated; hi--for; tan--those.
TRANSLATION
Endowed with such a faith, he seeks favors of a particular demigod and
obtains his desires. But in actuality these benefits are bestowed by Me
alone.
PURPORT
The demigods cannot award benedictions to the devotees without the
permission of the Supreme Lord. The living entity may forget that
everything is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the demigods do not
forget. So the worship of demigods and achievement of desired results
are due not to the demigods but to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
by arrangement. The less intelligent living entity does not know this,
and therefore he foolishly goes to the demigods for some benefit. But
the pure devotee, when in need of something, prays only to the Supreme
Lord. Asking for material benefit, however, is not a sign of a pure
devotee. A living entity goes to the demigods usually because he is mad
to fulfill his lust. This happens when something undue is desired by
the living entity and the Lord Himself does not fulfill the desire. In
the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one who worships the Supreme
Lord and at the same time desires material enjoyment is contradictory
in his desires. Devotional service of the Supreme Lord and the worship
of a demigod cannot be on the same platform because worship of a
demigod is material and devotional service to the Supreme Lord is
completely spiritual.
For the living entity who desires to return to Godhead, material
desires are impediments. A pure devotee of the Lord is therefore not
awarded the material benefits desired by less intelligent living
entities who prefer to worship demigods of the material world rather
than engage in devotional service of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 23
antavat tu phalam tesam
tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam
devan deva-yajo yanti
mad-bhakta yanti mam api
SYNONYMS
anta-vat tu--limited and temporary; phalam--fruits; tesam--their; tat--
that; bhavati--becomes; alpa-medhasam--of those of small intelligence;
devan--demigods' planets; deva-yajah--worshipers of demigods; yanti--
achieve; mat--My; bhaktah--devotees; yanti--attain; mam--to Me; api--
surely.
TRANSLATION
Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are
limited and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to the planets
of the demigods, but My devotees ultimately reach My supreme planet.
PURPORT
Some commentators on the Gita say that one who worships a demigod can
reach the Supreme Lord, but here it is clearly stated that the
worshipers of demigods go to the different planetary systems where
various demigods are situated, just as a worshiper of the sun achieves
the sun or a worshiper of the demigod of the moon achieves the moon.
Similarly, if anyone wants to worship a demigod like Indra, he can
attain that particular god's planet. It is not that everyone,
regardless of whatever demigod is worshiped, will reach the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. That is denied here, for it is clearly stated
that the worshipers of the demigods go to different planets in the
material world, but the devotee of the Supreme Lord goes directly to
the supreme planet of the Personality of Godhead.
Here the point may be raised that if the demigods are different parts
of the body of the Supreme Lord, then the same end should be achieved
by worshiping them. However, worshipers of the demigods are less
intelligent because they don't know to what part of the body food must
be supplied. Some of them are so foolish that they claim that there are
many parts and many ways to supply food. This isn't very sanguine. Can
anyone supply food to the body through the ears or eyes? They do not
know that these demigods are different parts of the universal body of
the Supreme Lord, and in their ignorance they believe that each and
every demigod is a separate God and a competitor of the Supreme Lord.
Not only are demigods parts of the Supreme Lord, but ordinary living
entities are also. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that the
brahmanas are the head of the Supreme Lord, the ksatriyas are the arms,
etc., and that all serve different functions. Regardless of the
situation, if one knows that both the demigods and himself are part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, his knowledge is perfect. But if he does
not understand this, he achieves different planets where the demigods
reside. This is not the same destination the devotee reaches.
The results achieved by the demigods' benedictions are perishable
because within this material world the planets, the demigods and their
worshipers are all perishable. Therefore it is clearly stated in this
verse that all results achieved by worshiping demigods are perishable,
and therefore such worship is performed by the less intelligent living
entity. Because the pure devotee engaged in Krsna consciousness in
devotional service of the Supreme Lord achieves eternal blissful
existence that is full of knowledge, his achievements and those of the
common worshiper of the demigods are different. The Supreme Lord is
unlimited; His favor is unlimited; His mercy is unlimited. Therefore
the mercy of the Supreme Lord upon His pure devotees is unlimited.
TEXT 24
avyaktam vyaktim apannam
manyante mam abuddhayah
param bhavam ajananto
mamavyayam anuttamam
SYNONYMS
avyaktam--nonmanifested; vyaktim--personality; apannam--achieved;
manyante--think; mam--unto Me; abuddhayah--less intelligent persons;
param--supreme; bhavam--state of being; ajanantah--without knowing;
mama--My; avyayam--imperishable; anuttamam--the finest.
TRANSLATION
Unintelligent men, who know Me not, think that I have assumed this form
and personality. Due to their small knowledge, they do not know My
higher nature, which is changeless and supreme.
PURPORT
Those who are worshipers of demigods have been described as less
intelligent persons, and here the impersonalists are similarly
described. Lord Krsna in His personal form is here speaking before
Arjuna, and still, due to ignorance, impersonalists argue that the
Supreme Lord ultimately has no form. Yamunacarya, a great devotee of
the Lord in the disciplic succession from Ramanujacarya, has written
two very appropriate verses in this connection. He says,
"My dear Lord, devotees like Vyasadeva and Narada know You to be the
Personality of Godhead. By understanding different Vedic literatures,
one can come to know Your characteristics, Your form and Your
activities, and one can thus understand that You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. But those who are in the modes of passion and
ignorance, the demons, the nondevotees, cannot understand You. They are
unable to understand You. However expert such nondevotees may be in
discussing Vedanta and the Upanisads and other Vedic literatures, it is
not possible for them to understand the Personality of Godhead."
(Stotra-ratna 12)
In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that the Personality of Godhead
cannot be understood simply by study of the Vedanta literature. Only by
the mercy of the Supreme Lord can the Personality of the Supreme be
known. Therefore in this verse it is clearly stated that not only are
the worshipers of the demigods less intelligent, but those nondevotees
who are engaged in Vedanta and speculation on Vedic literature without
any tinge of true Krsna consciousness are also less intelligent, and
for them it is not possible to understand God's personal nature.
Persons who are under the impression that the Absolute Truth is
impersonal are described as abuddhayah, which means one who does not
know the ultimate feature of the Absolute Truth. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam it is stated that supreme realization begins from the
impersonal Brahman and then rises to the localized Supersoul--but the
ultimate word in the Absolute Truth is the Personality of Godhead.
Modern impersonalists are still less intelligent, for they do not even
follow their great predecessor, Sankaracarya, who has specifically
stated 
that 
Krsna 
is 
the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead.
Impersonalists, therefore, not knowing the Supreme Truth, think Krsna
to be only the son of Devaki and Vasudeva, or a prince, or a powerful
living entity. This is also condemned in the Bhagavad-gita (9.11).
Avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam: "Only the fools regard Me
as an ordinary person."
The fact is that no one can understand Krsna without rendering
devotional service and without developing Krsna consciousness. The Gita
confirms this.
One cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, or His
form, quality or name simply by mental speculation or by discussing
Vedic literature. One must understand Him by devotional service. When
one is fully engaged in Krsna consciousness, beginning by chanting the
maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--then only can one understand the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nondevotee impersonalists think that
Krsna has a body made of this material nature and that all His
activities, His form and everything, are maya. These impersonalists are
known as Mayavadis. They do not know the ultimate truth.
The twentieth verse clearly states, kamais tais tair hrta-jnanah
prapadyante 'nya-devatah. "Those who are blinded by lusty desires
surrender unto the different demigods." It is accepted that besides the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, there are demigods who have their
different planets, and the Lord also has a planet. As stated in the
twenty-third verse, devan deva-yajo yanti mad-bhakta yanti mam api: the
worshipers of the demigods go to the different planets of the demigods,
and those who are devotees of Lord Krsna go to the Krsnaloka planet.
Although this is clearly stated, the foolish impersonalists still
maintain that the Lord is formless and that these forms are
impositions. From the study of the Gita does it appear that the
demigods and their abodes are impersonal? Clearly, neither the demigods
nor Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are impersonal. They are
all persons; Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He
has His own planet, and the demigods have theirs.
Therefore the monistic contention that ultimate truth is formless and
that form is imposed does not hold true. It is clearly stated here that
it is not imposed. From the Gita we can clearly understand that the
forms of the demigods and the form of the Supreme Lord are
simultaneously existing and that Lord Krsna is sac-cid-ananda, eternal
blissful knowledge. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme Absolute
Truth is ananda-mayo, or by nature full of blissful pleasure, and that
He is abhyasat, by nature the reservoir of unlimited auspicious
qualities. And in the Gita the Lord says that although He is aja
(unborn), He still appears. These are the facts that we should
understand from the Bhagavad-gita. We cannot understand how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead can be impersonal; the imposition theory of the
impersonalist monist is false as far as the statements of the Gita are
concerned. It is clear herein that the Supreme Absolute Truth, Lord
Krsna, has both form and personality.
TEXT 25
naham prakasah sarvasya
yoga-maya-samavrtah
mudho 'yam nabhijanati
loko mam ajam avyayam
SYNONYMS
na--nor; aham--I; prakasah--manifest; sarvasya--to everyone; yoga-maya-
-internal potency; samavrtah--covered; mudhah--foolish; ayam--this; na-
-not; abhijanati--can understand; lokah--such less intelligent persons;
mam--Me; ajam--unborn; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am
covered by My eternal creative potency [yoga-maya]; and so the deluded
world knows Me not, who am unborn and infallible.
PURPORT
It may be argued that since Krsna was present on this earth and was
visible to everyone, then why isn't He manifest to everyone now? But
actually He was not manifest to everyone. When Krsna was present there
were only a few people who could understand Him to be the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In the assembly of Kurus, when Sisupala spoke
against Krsna being elected president of the assembly, Bhisma supported
Him and proclaimed Him to be the Supreme God. Similarly, the Pandavas
and a few others knew that He was the Supreme, but not everyone. He was
not revealed to the nondevotees and the common man. Therefore in the
Gita Krsna says that but for His pure devotees, all men consider Him to
be like themselves. He was manifest only to His devotees as the
reservoir of all pleasure. But to others, to unintelligent nondevotees,
He was covered by His internal potency.
In the prayers of Kunti in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.8.19) it is said
that the Lord is covered by the curtain of yoga-maya and thus ordinary
people cannot understand Him. This yoga-maya curtain is also confirmed
in the Isopanisad (mantra 15), in which the devotee prays:
"O my Lord, You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and
devotional service to You is the highest religious principle.
Therefore, I pray that You will also maintain me. Your transcendental
form is covered by the yoga-maya. The brahmajyoti is the covering of
the internal potency. May You kindly remove this glowing effulgence
that impedes my seeing Your sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, Your eternal form
of bliss and knowledge."
This yoga-maya curtain is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of
the Gita. The Supreme Personality of Godhead in His transcendental form
of bliss and knowledge is covered by the internal potency of the
brahmajyoti, and the less intelligent impersonalists cannot see the
Supreme on this account. Also in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.7) there
is this prayer by Brahma: "O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O
Supersoul, O master of all mystery, who can calculate Your potency and
pastimes in this world? You are always expanding Your internal potency,
and therefore no one can understand You. Learned scientists and learned
scholars can examine the atomic constitution of the material world or
even the planets, but still they are unable to calculate Your energy
and potency, although You are present before them." The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna, is not only unborn but also avyaya,
inexhaustible. His eternal form is bliss and knowledge, and His
energies are all inexhaustible.
TEXT 26
vedaham samatitani
vartamanani carjuna
bhavisyani ca bhutani
mam tu veda na kascana
SYNONYMS
veda--know; aham--I; sama--equally; a titani--past; vartamanani--
present; ca--and; arjuna--O Arjuna; bhavisyani--future; ca--also;
bhutani--living entities; mam--Me; tu--but; veda--knows; na--not;
kascana--anyone.
TRANSLATION
O Arjuna, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that
has happened in the past, all that is happening in the present, and all
things that are yet to come. I also know all living entities; but Me no
one knows.
PURPORT
Here the question of personality and impersonality is clearly stated.
If Krsna, the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is considered
by the impersonalists to be maya, to be material, then He would, like
the living entity, change His body and forget everything in His past
life. Anyone with a material body cannot remember his past life, nor
can he foretell his future life, nor can he predict the outcome of his
present life; therefore he cannot know what is happening in past,
present and future. Unless one is liberated from material
contamination, he cannot know past, present and future.
Unlike the ordinary human being, Lord Krsna clearly says that He
completely knows what happened in the past, what is happening in the
present, and what will happen in the future. In the Fourth Chapter we
have seen that Lord Krsna remembers instructing Vivasvan, the sun-god,
millions of years ago. Krsna knows every living entity because He is
situated in every living being's heart as the Supreme Soul. But despite
His presence in every living entity as Supersoul and His presence
beyond the material sky, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
less intelligent cannot realize Him as the Supreme Person. Certainly
the transcendental body of Sri Krsna is not perishable. He is just like
the sun, and maya is like the cloud. In the material world we can see
that there is the sun and that there are clouds and different stars and
planets. The clouds may cover all these in the sky temporarily, but
this covering is only apparent to our limited vision. The sun, moon and
stars are not actually covered. Similarly, maya cannot cover the
Supreme Lord. By His internal potency He is not manifest to the less
intelligent class of men. As it is stated in the third verse of this
chapter, out of millions and millions of men, some try to become
perfect in this human form of life, and out of thousands and thousands
of such perfected men, hardly one can understand what Lord Krsna is.
Even if one is perfected by realization of impersonal Brahman or
localized Paramatma, he cannot possibly understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, without being in Krsna
consciousness.
TEXT 27
iccha-dvesa-samutthena
dvandva-mohena bharata
sarva-bhutani sammoham
sarge yanti parantapa
SYNONYMS
iccha--desire; dvesa--hate; samutthena--born; dvandva--duality; mohena-
-overcome; bharata--O scion of Bharata; sarva--all; bhutani--living
entities; sammoham--into delusion; sarge--in creation; yanti--go;
parantapa--O conqueror of enemies.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bharata [Arjuna], O conqueror of the foe, all living
entities are born into delusion, overcome by the dualities of desire
and hate.
PURPORT
The real constitutional position of the living entity is that of
subordination to the Supreme Lord, who is pure knowledge. When one is
deluded into separation from this pure knowledge, he becomes controlled
by illusory energy and cannot understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The illusory energy is manifested in the duality of desire and
hate. Due to desire and hate, the ignorant person wants to become one
with the Supreme Lord and envies Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Pure devotees, who are not so deluded or contaminated by
desire and hate, can understand that Lord Sri Krsna appears by His
internal potencies, but those who are deluded by duality and nescience
think that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is created by material
energies. 
This 
is 
their 
misfortune. 
Such 
deluded 
persons,
symptomatically, dwell in dualities of dishonor and honor, misery and
happiness, woman and man, good and bad, pleasure and pain, etc.,
thinking, "This is my wife; this is my house; I am the master of this
house; I am the husband of this wife." These are the dualities of
delusion. Those who are so deluded by dualities are completely foolish
and therefore cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 28
yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
SYNONYMS
yesam--whose; tu--but; anta-gatam--completely eradicated; papam--sin;
jananam--of the persons; punya--pious; karmanam--previous activities;
te--they; dvandva--duality; moha--delusion; nirmuktah--free from;
bhajante--worship; mam--Me; drdha-vratah--with determination.
TRANSLATION
Persons who have acted piously in previous lives and in this life,
whose sinful actions are completely eradicated and who are freed from
the duality of delusion, engage themselves in My service with
determination.
PURPORT
Those eligible for elevation to the transcendental position are
mentioned in this verse. For those who are sinful, atheistic, foolish
and deceitful, it is very difficult to transcend the duality of desire
and hate. Only those who have passed their lives in practicing the
regulative principles of religion, who have acted piously and who have
conquered sinful reactions can accept devotional service and gradually
rise to the pure knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Then,
gradually, they can meditate in trance on the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. That is the process of being situated on the spiritual
platform. This elevation is possible in Krsna consciousness in the
association of pure devotees who can deliver one from delusion.
It is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.2) that if one actually
wants to be liberated he must render service to the devotees (mahat-
sevam dvaram ahur vimukteh); but one who associates with materialistic
people is on the path leading to the darkest region of existence (tamo-
dvaram yositam sangi-sangam). All the devotees of the Lord traverse
this earth just to recover the conditioned souls from their delusion.
The impersonalists do not know that forgetting their constitutional
position as subordinate to the Supreme Lord is the greatest violation
of God's law. Unless one is reinstated in his own constitutional
position, it is not possible to understand the Supreme Personality or
to be fully engaged in His transcendental loving service with
determination.
TEXT 29
jara-marana-moksaya
mam asritya yatanti ye
te brahma tad viduh krtsnam
adhyatmam karma cakhilam
SYNONYMS
jara--old age; marana--death; moksaya--for the purpose of liberation;
mam--unto Me; asritya--taking shelter of; yatanti--endeavor; ye--all
those; te--such persons; brahma--Brahman; tat--actually that; viduh--
they know; krtsnam--everything; adhyatmam--transcendental; karma--
fruitive activities; ca--and; akhilam--entirely.
TRANSLATION
Intelligent persons who are endeavoring for liberation from old age and
death take refuge in Me in devotional service. They are actually
Brahman because they entirely know everything about transcendental and
fruitive activities.
PURPORT
Birth, death, old age and diseases affect this material body, but not
the spiritual body. There is no birth, death, old age and disease for
the spiritual body, so one who attains a spiritual body, becomes one of
the associates of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engages in
eternal devotional service, is really liberated. Aham brahmasmi: I am
spirit. It is said that one should understand that he is Brahman--
spirit soul. This Brahman conception of life is also in devotional
service, as described in this verse. The pure devotees are
transcendentally situated on the Brahman platform, and they know
everything about transcendental and material activities.
Four kinds of impure devotees who engage themselves in the
transcendental service of the Lord achieve their respective goals, and
by the grace of the Supreme Lord, when they are fully Krsna conscious,
they actually enjoy spiritual association with the Supreme Lord. But
those who are worshipers of demigods never reach the Supreme Lord in
His supreme planet. Even the less intelligent Brahman-realized persons
cannot reach the supreme planet of Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana.
Only persons who perform activities in Krsna consciousness (mam
asritya) are actually entitled to be called Brahman, because they are
actually endeavoring to reach the Krsna planet. Such persons have no
misgivings about Krsna, and thus they are factually Brahman.
Those who are engaged in worshiping the form or arca of the Lord, or
who are engaged in meditation on the Lord simply for liberation from
material bondage, also know, by the grace of the Lord, the purports of
Brahman, adhibhuta, etc., as explained by the Lord in the next chapter.
TEXT 30
sadhibhutadhidaivam mam
sadhiyajnam ca ye viduh
prayana-kale 'pi ca mam
te vidur yukta-cetasah
SYNONYMS
sa-adhibhuta--the governing principle of the material manifestation;
adhidaivam--underlying all the demigods; mam--Me; sa-adhiyajnam--
sustaining all sacrifices; ca--and; ye--those; viduh--know; prayana--of
death; kale--at the time; api--even; ca--and; mam--Me; te--they; viduh-
-know; yukta-cetasah--with steadfast minds.
TRANSLATION
Those who know Me as the Supreme Lord, as the governing principle of
the material manifestation, who know Me as the one underlying all the
demigods and as the one sustaining all sacrifices, can, with steadfast
mind, understand and know Me, even at the time of death.
PURPORT
Persons acting in Krsna consciousness are never entirely deviated from
the path of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the
transcendental association of Krsna consciousness, one can understand
how the Supreme Lord is the governing principle of the material
manifestation and even of the demigods. Gradually, by such
transcendental association, one becomes convinced of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself, and at the time of death such a Krsna
conscious person can never forget Krsna. Naturally he is thus promoted
to the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Vrndavana.
This Seventh Chapter particularly explains how one can become a fully
Krsna conscious person. The beginning of Krsna consciousness is
association of persons who are in Krsna consciousness. Such association
is spiritual and puts one directly in touch with the Supreme Lord, and,
by His grace, one can understand Krsna to be the Supreme God. At the
same time one can really understand the constitutional position of the
living entity and how the living entity forgets Krsna and becomes
entangled in material activities. By gradual development of Krsna
consciousness in good association, the living entity can understand
that due to forgetfulness of Krsna he has become conditioned by the
laws of material nature. He can also understand that this human form of
life is an opportunity to regain Krsna consciousness and that it should
be fully utilized to attain the causeless mercy of the Supreme Lord.
Many subjects have been discussed in this chapter: the man in distress,
the inquisitive man, the man in want of material necessities, knowledge
of Brahman, knowledge of Paramatma, liberation from birth, death and
diseases, and worship of the Supreme Lord. However, he who is actually
elevated in Krsna consciousness does not care for the different
processes. He simply directly engages himself in activities of Krsna
consciousness and thereby factually attains his constitutional position
as an eternal servitor of Lord Krsna. In such a situation he takes
pleasure in hearing and glorifying the Supreme Lord in pure devotional
service. He is convinced that by doing so, all his objectives will be
fulfilled. This determined faith is called drdha-vrata, and that is the
beginning of bhakti-yoga or transcendental loving service. That is the
verdict of all scriptures. This Seventh Chapter of the Gita is the
substance of that conviction.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Knowledge of the Absolute.