Chapter 17
The Divisions of Faith
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
ye sastra-vidhim utsrjya
yajante sraddhayanvitah
tesam nistha tu ka krsna
sattvam aho rajas tamah
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ye--those; sastra-vidhim--the regulations
of scripture; utsrjya--giving up; yajante--worship; sraddhaya--full
faith; anvitah--possessed of; tesam--of them; nistha--faith; tu--but;
ka--what is that; krsna--O Krsna; sattvam--in goodness; aho--said;
rajah--in passion; tamah--in ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said, O Krsna, what is the situation of one who do not follow
the principles of scripture but who worships according to his own
imagination? Is he in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?
PURPORT
In the Fourth Chapter, thirty-ninth verse, it is said that a person
faithful to a particular type of worship gradually becomes elevated to
the stage of knowledge and attains the highest perfectional stage of
peace and prosperity. In the Sixteenth Chapter, it is concluded that
one who does not follow the principles laid down in the scriptures is
called an asura, demon, and one who follows the scriptural injunctions
faithfully is called a deva, or demigod. Now, if one, with faith,
follows some rules which are not mentioned in the scriptural
injunctions, what is his position? This doubt of Arjuna's is to be
cleared by Krsna. Are those who create some sort of God by selecting a
human being and placing their faith in him worshiping in goodness,
passion or ignorance? Do such persons attain the perfectional stage of
life? Is it possible for them to be situated in real knowledge and
elevate themselves to the highest perfectional stage? Do those who do
not follow the rules and regulations of the scriptures but who have
faith in something and worship gods and demigods and men attain success
in their effort? Arjuna is putting these questions to Krsna.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
tri-vidha bhavati sraddha
dehinam sa svabhava-ja
sattviki rajasi caiva
tamasi ceti tam srnu
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; bhavati--become; sraddha--faith; dehinam--of the
embodied; sa--that; sva-bhava-ja--according to his mode of material
nature; sattviki--mode of goodness; rajasi--mode of passion; ca--also;
eva--certainly; tamasi--mode of ignorance; ca--and; iti--thus; tam--
that; srnu--hear from Me.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired by the
embodied soul, one's faith can be of three kinds--goodness, passion or
ignorance. Now hear about these.
PURPORT
Those who know the rules and regulations of the scriptures, but, out of
laziness or indolence, give up following these rules and regulations
are governed by the modes of material nature. According to their
previous activities in the modes of goodness, passion or ignorance,
they acquire a nature which is of a specific quality. The association
of the living entity with the different modes of nature has been going
on perpetually since the living entity is in contact with material
nature. Thus he acquires different types of mentality according to his
association with the material modes. But this nature can be changed if
one associates with a bona fide spiritual master and abides by his
rules and the scriptures. Gradually, one can change his position from
ignorance to goodness, or from passion to goodness. The conclusion is
that blind faith in a particular mode of nature cannot help a person
become elevated to the perfectional stage. One has to consider things
carefully, with intelligence, in the association of a bona fide
spiritual master. Thus one can change his position to a higher mode of
nature.
TEXT 3
sattvanurupa sarvasya
sraddha bhavati bharata
sraddha-mayo 'yam puruso
yo yac-chraddhah sa eva sah
SYNONYMS
sattva-anurupa--according to the existence; sarvasya--of everyone;
sraddha--faith; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son of Bharata; sraddha--
faith; mayah--full; ayam--this; purusah--living entity; yah--anyone;
yat--that; sraddhah--faith; sah--that; eva--certainly; sah--he.
TRANSLATION
According to one's existence under the various modes of nature, one
evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a
particular faith according to the modes he has acquired.
PURPORT
Everyone has a particular type of faith, regardless of what he is. But
his faith is considered good, passionate or ignorant according to the
nature he has acquired. Thus, according to his particular type of
faith, one associates with certain persons. Now the real fact is that
every living being, as is stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, is
originally the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord.
Therefore one is originally transcendental to all the modes of material
nature. But when one forgets his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and comes into contact with the material nature
in conditional life, he generates his own position by association with
the different varieties of material nature. The resultant artificial
faith and existence are only material. Although one may be conducted by
some impression, or some conception of life, still, originally, he is
nirguna, or transcendental. Therefore one has to become cleansed of the
material contamination that he has acquired in order to regain his
relationship with the Supreme Lord. That is the only path back without
fear: Krsna consciousness. If one is situated in Krsna consciousness,
then that path is guaranteed for his elevation to the perfectional
stage. If one does not take to this path of self-realization, then he
is surely to be conducted by the influence of the modes of nature.
The word sraddha, or faith, is very significant in this verse. Sraddha
or faith always comes out of the works of goodness. One's faith may be
in a demigod or some created God or some mental concoction. It is
supposed to be one's strong faith in something that is productive of
the works of material goodness. But in material conditional life, no
works of material nature are completely purified. They are mixed. They
are not in pure goodness. Pure goodness is transcendental; in pure
goodness one can understand the real nature of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. As long as one's faith is not completely in purified
goodness, the faith is subject to contamination by any of the modes of
material nature. The contaminated modes of material nature expand to
the heart. Therefore according to the position of the heart in contact
with a particular mode of material nature, one's faith is established.
It should be understood, that if one's heart is in the mode of
goodness, his faith is also in the mode of goodness. If his heart is in
the mode of passion, his faith is also in the mode of passion. And if
his heart is in the mode of darkness, illusion, his faith is also thus
contaminated. Thus we find different types of faith in this world, and
there are different types of religions due to different types of faith.
The real principle of religious faith is situated in the mode of pure
goodness, but because the heart is tainted, we find different types of
religious principles. Thus according to different types of faith, there
are different kinds of worship.
TEXT 4
yajante sattvika devan
yaksa-raksamsi rajasah
pretan bhuta-ganams canye
yajante tamasa janah
SYNONYMS
yajante--worship; sattvikah--those who are in the mode of goodness;
devan--demigods; yaksa-raksamsi rajasah--those who are in the mode of
passion worship demons; pretan--dead spirits; bhuta-ganan--ghosts; ca
anye--and others; yajante--worship; tamasah--in the mode of ignorance;
janah--people.
TRANSLATION
Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of
passion worship the demons and those in the mode of ignorance worship
ghosts and spirits.
PURPORT
In this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead describes different
kinds of worshipers according to their external activities. According
to scriptural injunction only the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
worshipable, but those who are not very conversant with, or faithful
to, the scriptural injunctions worship different objects, according to
their specific situations in the modes of material nature. Those who
are situated in goodness generally worship the demigods. The demigods
include Brahma, Siva and others such as Indra, Candra and the sun-god.
There are various demigods. Those in goodness worship a particular
demigod for a particular purpose. Similarly, those who are in the mode
of passion worship the demons. We recall that during the Second World
War, a man in Calcutta worshiped Hitler because thanks to that war he
had amassed a large amount of wealth by dealing in the black market.
Similarly, those in the modes of passion and ignorance generally select
a powerful man to be God. They think that anyone can be worshiped as
God and that the same results will be obtained.
Now, it is clearly described here that those who are in the mode of
passion worship and create such gods, and those who are in the mode of
ignorance, in darkness, worship dead spirits. Sometimes people worship
at the tomb of some dead man. Sexual service is also considered to be
in the mode of darkness. Similarly, in remote villages in India there
are worshipers of ghosts. We have seen that in India the lower-class
people sometimes go to the forest, and if they have knowledge that a
ghost lives in a tree, they worship that tree and offer sacrifices.
These different kinds of worship are not actually God worship. God
worship is for persons who are transcendentally situated in pure
goodness. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.3.23) it is said, sattvam
visuddham vasudeva-sabditam: "When a man is situated in pure goodness,
he worships Vasudeva." The purport is that those who are completely
purified of the material modes of nature and who are transcendentally
situated can worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The impersonalists are supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness,
and they worship five kinds of demigods. They worship the impersonal
Visnu, or the Visnu form in the material world, which is known as
philosophized Visnu. Visnu is the expansion of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but the impersonalists, because they do not ultimately
believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, imagine that the Visnu
form is just another aspect of the impersonal Brahman; similarly, they
imagine that Lord Brahma is the impersonal form in the material mode of
passion. Thus they sometimes describe five kinds of gods that are
worshipable, but because they think that the actual truth is impersonal
Brahman, they dispose of all worshipable objects at the ultimate end.
In conclusion, the different qualities of the material modes of nature
can be purified through association with persons who are of
transcendental nature.
TEXTS 5-6
asastra-vihitam ghoram
tapyante ye tapo janah
dambhahankara-samyuktah
kama-raga-balanvitah
karsayantah sarira-stham
bhuta-gramam acetasah
mam caivantah sarira-stham
tan viddhy asura-niscayan
SYNONYMS
asastra--not mentioned in the scriptures; vihitam--directed; ghoram--
harmful to others; tapyante--undergo penances; ye--those; tapah--
austerities; 
janah--persons; 
dambha--pride; 
ahankara--egoism;
samyuktah--engaged; kama--lust; raga--attachment; bala--force; anvitah-
-impelled by; karsayantah--tormenting; sarira-stham--situated within
the body; bhuta-gramam--combination of material elements; acetasah--by
such a misled mentality; mam--to Me; ca--also; eva--certainly; antah--
within; sarira-stham--situated in the body; tan--them; viddhi--
understand; asura--demons; niscayan--certainly.
TRANSLATION
Those who undergo severe austerities and penances not recommended in
the scriptures, performing them out of pride, egoism, lust and
attachment, who are impelled by passion and who torture their bodily
organs as well as the Supersoul dwelling within are to be known as
demons.
PURPORT
There are persons who manufacture modes of austerity and penances which
are not mentioned in the scriptural injunctions. For instance, fasting
for some ulterior purpose, such as to promote a purely political end is
not mentioned in the scriptural directions. The scriptures recommend
fasting for spiritual advancement, not for some political end or social
purpose. Persons who take to such austerities are, according to
Bhagavad-gita, certainly demoniac. Their acts are against the
scriptural injunctions and are not beneficial for the people in
general. Actually, they act out of pride, false ego, lust and
attachment for material enjoyment. By such activities, not only is the
combination of material elements of which the body is constructed
disturbed, but also the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself living
within the body. Such unauthorized fasting or austerities for some
political end are certainly very disturbing to others. They are not
mentioned in the Vedic literature. A demoniac person may think that he
can force his enemy or other parties to comply with his desire by this
method, but sometimes one dies by such fasting. These acts are not
approved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He says that those
who engage in them are demons. Such demonstrations are insults to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead because they are enacted in disobedience
to the Vedic scriptural injunctions. The word acetasah is significant
in this connection. Persons of normal mental condition must obey the
scriptural injunctions. Those who are not in such a position neglect
and disobey the scriptures and manufacture their own way of austerities
and penances. One should always remember the ultimate end of the
demoniac people, as described in the previous chapter. The Lord forces
them to take birth in the wombs of demoniac persons. Consequently they
will live by demoniac principles life after life without knowing their
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If, however, such
persons are fortunate enough to be guided by a spiritual master who can
direct them to the path of Vedic wisdom, they can get out of this
entanglement and ultimately achieve the supreme goal.
TEXT 7
aharas tv api sarvasya
tri-vidho bhavati priyah
yajnas tapas tatha danam
tesam bhedam imam srnu
SYNONYMS
aharah--eating; tu--certainly; api--also; sarvasya--of everyone; tri-
vidhah--three kinds; bhavati--there are; priyah--dear; yajnah--
sacrifice; tapah--austerity; tatha--also; danam--charity; tesam--of
them; bhedam--differences; imam--thus; srnu--hear.
TRANSLATION
Even food of which all partake is of three kinds, according to the
three modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices,
austerities and charity. Listen, and I shall tell you of the
distinctions of these.
PURPORT
In terms of different situations in the modes of material nature, there
are differences in the manner of eating, performing sacrifices,
austerities and charities. They are not all conducted on the same
level. Those who can understand analytically what kind of performances
are in what modes of material nature are actually wise; those who
consider all kinds of sacrifice or foods or charity to be the same
cannot discriminate, and they are foolish. There are missionary workers
who advocate that one can do whatever he likes and attain perfection.
But these foolish guides are not acting according to the direction of
the scripture. They are manufacturing ways and misleading the people in
general.
TEXT 8-10
ayuh-sattva-balarogya-
sukha-priti-vivardhanah
rasyah snigdhah sthira hrdya
aharah sattvika-priyah
katv-amla-lavanaty-usna-
tiksna-ruksa-vidahinah
ahara rajasasyesta
duhkha-sokamaya-pradah
yata-yamam gata-rasam
puti paryusitam ca yat
ucchistam api camedhyam
bhojanam tamasa-priyam
SYNONYMS
ayuh--duration of life; sattva--existence; bala--strength; arogya--
health; sukha--happiness; priti--satisfaction; vivardhanah--increasing;
rasyah--juicy; snigdhah--fatty; sthirah--enduring; hrdyah--pleasing to
the heart; aharah--food; sattvika--goodness; priyah--palatable. katu--
bitter; amla--sour; lavana--salty; ati-usna--very hot; tiksna--pungent;
ruksa--dry; vidahinah--burning; aharah--food; rajasasya--in the mode of
passion; istah--palatable; duhkha--distress; soka--misery; amaya
pradah--causing disease. yata-yamam--food cooked three hours before
being eaten; gata-rasam--tasteless; puti--bad smelling; paryusitam--
decomposed; ca--also; yat--that which; ucchistam--remnants of food
eaten by others; api--also; ca--and; amedhyam--untouchable; bhojanam--
eating; tamasa--in the mode of darkness; priyam--dear.
TRANSLATION
Foods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify
one's existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction.
Such nourishing foods are sweet, juicy, fatty and palatable. Foods that
are too bitter, too sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are liked by
people in the mode of passion. Such foods cause pain, distress, and
disease. Food cooked more than three hours before being eaten, which is
tasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean, is food liked by
people in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
The purpose of food is to increase the duration of life, purify the
mind and aid bodily strength. This is its only purpose. In the past,
great authorities selected those foods that best aid health and
increase life's duration, such as milk products, sugar, rice, wheat,
fruits and vegetables. These foods are very dear to those in the mode
of goodness. Some other foods, such as baked corn and molasses, while
not very palatable in themselves, can be made pleasant when mixed with
milk or other foods. They are then in the mode of goodness. All these
foods are pure by nature. They are quite distinct from untouchable
things like meat and liquor. Fatty foods, as mentioned in the eighth
verse, have no connection with animal fat obtained by slaughter. Animal
fat is available in the form of milk, which is the most wonderful of
all foods. Milk, butter, cheese and similar products give animal fat in
a form which rules out any need for the killing of innocent creatures.
It is only through brute mentality that this killing goes on. The
civilized method of obtaining needed fat is by milk. Slaughter is the
way of subhumans. Protein is amply available through split peas, dal,
whole wheat, etc.
Foods in the mode of passion, which are bitter, too salty, or too hot
or overly mixed with red pepper, cause misery by producing mucus in the
stomach, leading to disease. Foods in the mode of ignorance or darkness
are essentially those that are not fresh. Any food cooked more than
three hours before it is eaten (except prasadam, food offered to the
Lord) is considered to be in the mode of darkness. Because they are
decomposing, such foods give a bad odor, which often attracts people in
this mode but repulses those in the mode of goodness.
Remnants of food may be eaten only when they are part of a meal that
was first offered to the Supreme Lord or first eaten by saintly
persons, especially the spiritual master. Otherwise the remnants of
food are considered to be in the mode of darkness, and they increase
infection or disease. Such foodstuffs, although very palatable to
persons in the mode of darkness, are neither liked nor even touched by
those in the mode of goodness. The best food is the remnants of what is
offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Bhagavad-gita the
Supreme Lord says that He accepts preparations of vegetables, flour and
milk when offered with devotion. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Of course,
devotion and love are the chief things which the Supreme Personality of
Godhead accepts. But it is also mentioned that the prasadam should be
prepared in a particular way. Any food prepared by the injunctions of
the scripture and offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be
taken even if prepared long, long ago, because such food is
transcendental. Therefore to make food antiseptic, eatable and
palatable for all persons, one should offer food to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 11
aphalakanksibhir yajno
vidhi-disto ya ijyate
yastavyam eveti manah
samadhaya sa sattvikah
SYNONYMS
aphala-akanksibhih--devoid of desire for result; yajnah--sacrifice;
vidhi--accordingly; distah--direction; yah--anyone; ijyate--performs;
yastavyam--must be performed; eva--certainly; iti--thus; manah--mind;
samadhaya--fixed in; sah--he; sattvikah--is in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
Of sacrifices, that sacrifice performed according to duty and to
scriptural rules, and with no expectation of reward, is of the nature
of goodness.
PURPORT
The general tendency is to offer sacrifice with some purpose in mind,
but here it is stated that sacrifice should be performed without any
such desire. It should be done as a matter of duty. Take, for example,
the performance of rituals in temples or in churches. Generally they
are performed with the purpose of material benefit, but that is not in
the mode of goodness. One should go to a temple or church as a matter
of duty, offer respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offer
flowers and eatables. Everyone thinks that there is no use in going to
the temple just to worship God. But worship for economic benefit is not
recommended in the scriptural injunctions. One should go simply to
offer respect to the Deity. That will place one in the mode of
goodness. It is the duty of every civilized man to obey the injunctions
of the scriptures and offer respect to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 12
abhisandhaya tu phalam
dambhartham api caiva yat
ijyate bharata-srestha
tam yajnam viddhi rajasam
SYNONYMS
abhisandhaya--desiring; tu--but; phalam--the result; dambha--pride;
artham--for the sake of; api--also; ca--and; eva--certainly; yat--that
which; ijyate--worship; bharata-srestha--O chief of the Bharatas; tam--
that; yajnam--sacrifice; viddhi--know; rajasam--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATION
But that sacrifice performed for some material end or benefit or
preformed ostentatiously, out of pride, is of the nature of passion, O
chief of the Bharatas.
PURPORT
Sometimes sacrifices and rituals are performed for elevation to the
heavenly kingdom or for some material benefits in this world. Such
sacrifices or ritualistic performances are considered to be in the mode
of passion.
TEXT 13
vidhi-hinam asrstannam
mantra-hinam adaksinam
sraddha-virahitam yajnam
tamasam paricaksate
SYNONYMS
vidhi-hinam--without scriptural direction; asrsta-annam--without
distribution of prasadam; mantra-hinam--with no chanting of the Vedic
hymns; adaksinam--with no remunerations to the priests; sraddha--faith;
virahitam--without; yajnam--sacrifice; tamasam--in the mode of
ignorance; paricaksate--is to be considered.
TRANSLATION
And that sacrifice performed in defiance of scriptural injunctions, in
which no spiritual food is distributed, no hymns are chanted and no
remunerations are made to the priests, and which is faithless--that
sacrifice if of the nature of ignorance.
PURPORT
Faith in the mode of darkness or ignorance is actually faithlessness.
Sometimes people worship some demigod just to make money and then spend
the money for recreation, ignoring the scriptural injunctions. Such
ceremonial shows of religiosity are not accepted as genuine. They are
all in the mode of darkness; they produce a demoniac mentality and do
not benefit human society.
TEXT 14
deva-dvija-guru-prajna-
pujanam saucam arjavam
brahmacaryam ahimsa ca
sariram tapa ucyate
SYNONYMS
deva--the Supreme Lord; dvija--the brahmana; guru--the spiritual
master; prajna--worshipable personalities; pujanam--worship; saucam--
cleanliness; arjavam--simplicity; brahmacaryam--celibacy; ahimsa--
nonviolence; ca--also; sariram--pertaining to the body; tapah--
austerity; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
The austerity of the body consists of this: worship of the Supreme
Lord, the brahmanas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the
father and mother. Cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence
are also austerities of the body.
PURPORT
The Supreme Godhead here explains the different kinds of austerity and
penance. First He explains the austerities and penances practiced by
the body. One should offer, or learn to offer, respect to God or to the
demigods, the perfect, qualified brahmanas and the spiritual master and
superiors like father, mother or any person who is conversant with
Vedic knowledge. These should be given proper respect. One should
practice cleansing oneself externally and internally, and he should
learn to become simple in behavior. He should not do anything which is
not sanctioned by the scriptural injunctions. He should not indulge in
sex outside of married life, for sex is sanctioned in the scriptures
only in marriage, not otherwise. This is called celibacy. These are
penances and austerities as far as the body is concerned.
TEXT 15
anudvega-karam vakyam
satyam priya-hitam ca yat
svadhyayabhyasanam caiva
van-mayam tapa ucyate
SYNONYMS
anudvega--not agitating; karam--producing; vakyam--words; satyam--
truthful; priya--dear; hitam--beneficial; ca--also; yat--which;
svadhyaya--Vedic study; abhyasanam--practice; ca--also; eva--certainly;
van-mayam--of the voice; tapah--austerity; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
Austerity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially
and in avoiding speech that offends. One should also recite the Vedas
regularly.
PURPORT
One should not speak in such a way as to agitate the minds of others.
Of course, when a teacher speaks, he can speak the truth for the
instruction of his students, but such a teacher should not speak to
others who are not his students if he will agitate their minds. This is
penance as far as talking is concerned. Besides that, one should not
talk nonsense. When speaking in spiritual circles, one's statements
must be upheld by the scriptures. One should at once quote from
scriptural authority to back up what he is saying. At the same time,
such talk should be very pleasurable to the ear. By such discussions,
one may derive the highest benefit and elevate human society. There is
a limitless stock of Vedic literature, and one should study this. This
is called penance of speech.
TEXT 16
manah-prasadah saumyatvam
maunam atma-vinigrahah
bhava-samsuddhir ity etat
tapo manasam ucyate
SYNONYMS
manah-prasadah--satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam--without duplicity
towards others; maunam--gravity; atma--self; vinigrahah--control;
bhava--nature; samsuddhih--purification; iti--thus; etat--that is;
tapah--austerity; manasam--of the mind; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purity of
thought are the austerities of the mind.
PURPORT
To make the mind austere is to detach it from sense gratification. It
should be so trained that it can be always thinking of doing good for
others. The best training for the mind is gravity in thought. One
should not deviate from Krsna consciousness and must always avoid sense
gratification. To purify one's nature is to become Krsna conscious.
Satisfaction of the mind can be obtained only by taking the mind away
from thoughts of sense enjoyment. The more we think of sense enjoyment,
the more the mind becomes dissatisfied. In the present age we
unnecessarily engage the mind in so many different ways for sense
gratification, and so there is no possibility of the mind's becoming
satisfied. The best course is to divert the mind to the Vedic
literature, which is full of satisfying stories, as in the Puranas and
the Mahabharata. One can take advantage of this knowledge and thus
become purified. The mind should be devoid of duplicity, and one should
think of the welfare of all. Silence means that one is always thinking
of self-realization. The person in Krsna consciousness observes perfect
silence in this sense. Control of the mind means detaching the mind
from sense enjoyment. One should be straightforward in his dealings and
thereby purify his existence. All these qualities together constitute
austerity in mental activities.
TEXT 17
sraddhaya paraya taptam
tapas tat tri-vidham naraih
aphalakanksibhir yuktaih
sattvikam paricaksate
SYNONYMS
sraddhaya--with faith; paraya--transcendental; taptam--execution;
tapah--austerity; tat--that; tri-vidham--three kinds; naraih--by men;
aphala-akanksibhih--without desires for fruits; yuktaih--engaged;
sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; paricaksate--is called.
TRANSLATION
This threefold austerity, practiced by men whose aim is not to benefit
themselves materially but to please the Supreme, is of the nature of
goodness.
TEXT 18
satkara-mana-pujartham
tapo dambhena caiva yat
kriyate tad iha proktam
rajasam calam adhruvam
SYNONYMS
sat-kara--respect; mana--honor; puja-artham--for worship; tapah--
austerity; dambhena--pride; ca--also; eva--certainly; yat--which is;
kriyate--performed; tat--that; iha--in this world; proktam--is said;
rajasam--in the mode of passion; calam--flickering; adhruvam--
temporary.
TRANSLATION
Those ostentatious penances and austerities which are performed in
order to gain respect, honor and worship are said to be in the mode of
passion. They are neither stable nor permanent.
PURPORT
Sometimes penance and austerity are executed to attract people and
receive honor, respect and worship from others. Persons in the mode of
passion arrange to be worshiped by subordinates and let them wash their
feet and offer riches. Such arrangements artificially made by the
performance of penances are considered to be in the mode of passion.
The results are temporary; they can be continued for some time, but
they are not permanent.
TEXT 19
mudha-grahenatmano yat
pidaya kriyate tapah
parasyotsadanartham va
tat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMS
mudha--foolish; grahena--with endeavor; atmanah--of one's own self;
yat--which; pidaya--by torture; kriyate--is performed; tapah--penance;
parasya--to others; utsadana-artham--causing annihilation; va--or; tat-
-that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And those penances and austerities which are performed foolishly by
means of obstinate self-torture, or to destroy or injure others, are
said to be in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
There are instances of foolish penance undertaken by demons like
Hiranyakasipu, who performed austere penances to become immortal and
kill the demigods. He prayed to Brahma for such things, but ultimately
he was killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. To undergo
penances for something which is impossible is certainly in the mode of
ignorance.
TEXT 20
datavyam iti yad danam
diyate 'nupakarine
dese kale ca patre ca
tad danam sattvikam smrtam
SYNONYMS
datavyam--worth giving; iti--thus; yat--that which; danam--charity;
diyate--given; anupakarine--to any person irrespective of doing good;
dese--in place; kale--in time; ca--also; patre--suitable person; ca--
and; tat--that; danam--charity; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness;
smrtam--consider.
TRANSLATION
That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to
a worthy person, and without expectation of return, is considered to be
charity in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
In the Vedic literature, charity given to a person engaged in spiritual
activities is recommended. There is no recommendation for giving
charity 
indiscriminately. 
Spiritual 
perfection 
is 
always 
a
consideration. Therefore charity is recommended to be given at a place
of pilgrimage and at lunar or solar eclipses or at the end of the month
or to a qualified brahmana or a Vaisnava (devotee) or in temples. Such
charities should be given without any consideration of return. Charity
to the poor is sometimes given out of compassion, but if a poor man is
not worth giving charity to, then there is no spiritual advancement. In
other words, indiscriminate charity is not recommended in the Vedic
literature.
TEXT 21
yat tu pratyupakarartham
phalam uddisya va punah
diyate ca pariklistam
tad danam rajasam smrtam
SYNONYMS
yat--that which; tu--but; prati-upakara-artham--for the sake of getting
some return; phalam--result; uddisya--desiring; va--or; punah--again;
diyate--is given in charity; ca--also; pariklistam--grudgingly; tat--
that; danam--charity; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--is
understood to be.
TRANSLATION
But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a
desire for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be
charity in the mode of passion.
PURPORT
Charity is sometimes performed for elevation to the heavenly kingdom
and sometimes with great trouble and with repentance afterwards. "Why
have I spent so much in this way?" Charity is also sometimes given
under some obligation, at the request of a superior. These kinds of
charity are said to be in the mode of passion.
There are many charitable foundations which offer their gifts to
institutions where sense gratification goes on. Such charities are not
recommended in the Vedic scripture. Only charity in the mode of
goodness is recommended.
TEXT 22
adesa-kale yad danam
apatrebhyas ca diyate
asat-krtam avajnatam
tat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMS
adesa--unpurified place; kale--unpurified time; yat--that which; danam-
-charity; upatrebhyah--to unworthy persons; ca--also; diyate--is given;
asat-krtam--without respect; avajnatam--without proper attention; tat--
that; tamasam--in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And charity performed at an improper place and time and given to
unworthy persons without respect and with contempt is charity in the
mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
Contributions for indulgence in intoxication and gambling are not
encouraged here. That sort of contribution is in the mode of ignorance.
Such charity is not beneficial; rather, sinful persons are encouraged.
Similarly, if a person gives charity to a suitable person without
respect and without attention, that sort of charity is also said to be
in the mode of darkness.
TEXT 23
om tat sad iti nirdeso
brahmanas tri-vidhah smrtah
brahmanas tena vedas ca
yajnas ca vihitah pura
SYNONYMS
om--indication of the Supreme; tat--that; sat--eternal; iti--that;
nirdesah--indication; brahmanah--of the Supreme; tri-vidhah--three
kinds; smrtah--consider; brahmanah--the brahmanas; tena--therefore;
vedah--the Vedic literature; ca--also; yajnah--sacrifice; ca--also;
vihitah--used; pura--formerly.
TRANSLATION
From the beginning of creation, the three syllables--om tat sat--have
been used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth [Brahman]. They were
uttered by brahmanas while chanting Vedic hymns and during sacrifices,
for the satisfaction of the Supreme.
PURPORT
It has been explained that penance, sacrifice, charity and foods are
divided into three categories: the modes of goodness, passion and
ignorance. But whether first class, second class or third class, they
are all conditioned, contaminated by the material modes of nature. When
they are aimed at the Supreme--om tat sat, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the eternal--they become means for spiritual elevation. In the
scriptural injunctions such an objective is indicated. These three
words, om tat sat, particularly indicate the Absolute Truth, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedic hymns, the word om is
always found.
One who acts without following the regulations of the scriptures will
not attain the Absolute Truth. He will get some temporary result, but
not the ultimate end of life. The conclusion is that the performance of
charity, sacrifice and penance must be done in the mode of goodness.
Performed in the mode of passion and ignorance, they are certainly
inferior in quality. The three words om tat sat are uttered in
conjunction with the holy name of the Supreme Lord, e.g., om tad
visnoh. Whenever a Vedic hymn or the holy name of the Supreme Lord is
uttered, om is added. This is the indication of Vedic literature. These
three words are taken from Vedic hymns. Om ity etad brahmano nedistham
nama (Rg Veda) indicates the first goal. Then tat tvam asi (Chandogya
Upanisad 6.8.7) indicates the second goal. And sad eva saumya
(Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.1) indicates the third goal. Combined they
become om tat sat. Formerly when Brahma, the first created living
entity, performed sacrifices, he spoke these three names of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The same principle holds by disciplic
succession. So this hymn has great significance. Bhagavad-gita
recommends, therefore, that any work done should be done for om tat
sat, or for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When one performs
penance, charity, and sacrifice with these three words, he is acting in
Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is a scientific execution of
transcendental activities which enables one to return home, back to
Godhead. There is no loss of energy in acting in such a transcendental
way.
TEXT 24
tasmad om ity udahrtya
yajna-dana-tapah-kriyah
pravartante vidhanoktah
satatam brahma-vadinam
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; om--beginning with om; iti--thus; udahrtya--
indicating; yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; kriyah--
performances; 
pravartante--begin; 
vidhana-uktah--according 
to
scriptural regulation; satatam--always; brahma-vadinam--of the
transcendentalists.
TRANSLATION
Thus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and
penances, beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme.
PURPORT
Om tad visnoh paramam padam (Rg Veda 1.22.20). The lotus feet of Visnu
are the supreme devotional platform. The performance of everything on
behalf of the Supreme Personality of Godhead assures the perfection of
all activity.
TEXT 25
tad ity anabhisandhaya
phalam yajna-tapah-kriyah
dana-kriyas ca vividhah
kriyante moksa-kanksibhih
SYNONYMS
tat--that; iti--they; anabhisandhaya--without fruitive result; phalam--
result of sacrifice; yajna--sacrifice; tapah--penance; kriyah--
activities; dana--charity; kriyah--activities; ca--also; vividhah--
varieties; kriyante--done; moksa-kanksibhih--those who actually desire
liberation.
TRANSLATION
One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat.
The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from the
material entanglement.
PURPORT
To be elevated to the spiritual position, one should not act for any
material gain. Acts should be performed for the ultimate gain of being
transferred to the spiritual kingdom, back to home, back to Godhead.
TEXTS 26-27
sad-bhave sadhu-bhave ca
sad ity etat prayujyate
prasaste karmani tatha
sac-chabdah partha yujyate
yajne tapasi dane ca
sthitih sad iti cocyate
karma caiva tad-arthiyam
sad ity evabhidhiyate
SYNONYMS
sat-bhave--in the sense of the nature of the Supreme; sadhu-bhave--in
the sense of the nature of devotion; ca--also; sat--the supreme; iti--
thus; etat--this; prayujyate--is used; prasaste--bona fide; karmani--
activities; tatha--also; sat-sabdah--the sound sat; partha--O son of
Prtha; yujyate--is used; yajne--sacrifice; tapasi--in penance; dane--
charity; ca--also; sthitih--situated; sat--the Supreme; iti--thus; ca--
and; ucyate--pronounced; karma--work; ca--also; eva--certainly; tat--
that; arthiyam--are meant; sat--Supreme; iti--thus; eva--certainly;
abhidhiyate--is practiced.
TRANSLATION
The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it is
indicated by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance and of
charity, true to the absolute nature, are performed to please the
Supreme Person, O son of Prtha.
PURPORT
The words prasaste karmani, or prescribed duties, indicate that there
are many activities prescribed in the Vedic literature which are
purificatory processes beginning from the parental care up to the end
of one's life. Such purificatory processes are adopted for the ultimate
liberation of the living entity. In all such activities it is
recommended that one should vibrate om tat sat. The words sad-bhave and
sadhu-bhave indicate the transcendental situation. One who is acting in
Krsna consciousness is called sattva, and one who is fully conscious of
the activities in Krsna consciousness is called a sadhu. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam (3.25.25) it is said that the transcendental subject matter
becomes clear in the association of the devotees. Without good
association one cannot achieve transcendental knowledge. When
initiating a person or offering the sacred thread, one vibrates the
words om tat sat. Similarly, in all kinds of yajna performances, the
supreme object, om tat sat is invoked. These words om tat sat are used
to perfect all activities. The supreme om tat sat makes everything
complete.
TEXT 28
asraddhaya hutam dattam
tapas taptam krtam ca yat
asad ity ucyate partha
na ca tat pretya no iha
SYNONYMS
asraddhaya--without faith; hutam--offered in sacrifice; dattam--given;
tapah--penance; taptam--executed; krtam--performed; ca--also; yat--that
which; asat--false; iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; partha--O son of
Prtha; na--never; ca--also; tat--that; pretya--after death; no--nor;
iha--in this life.
TRANSLATION
But sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith in
the Supreme are nonpermanent, O son of Prtha, regardless of whatever
rites are performed. They are called asat and are useless both in this
life and the next.
PURPORT
Anything done without the transcendental objective--whether it be
sacrifice, charity or penance--is useless. Therefore, in this verse, it
is declared that such activities are abominable. Everything should be
done for the Supreme in Krsna consciousness. Without such faith, and
without the proper guidance, there can never be any fruit. In all the
Vedic scriptures, faith in the Supreme is advised. In the pursuit of
all Vedic instructions, the ultimate goal is the understanding of
Krsna. No one can obtain success without following this principle.
Therefore, the best course is to work from the very beginning in Krsna
consciousness under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master. That
is the way to make everything successful.
In the conditional state, people are attracted to worship demigods,
ghosts, or Yaksas like Kuvera. The mode of goodness is better than the
modes of passion and ignorance, but one who takes directly to Krsna
consciousness is transcendental to all three modes of material nature.
Although there is a process of gradual elevation, if one, by the
association of pure devotees, takes directly to Krsna consciousness,
that is the best way. And that is recommended in this chapter. To
achieve success in this way, one must first find the proper spiritual
master and receive training under his direction. Then one can achieve
faith in the Supreme. When that faith matures, in course of time, it is
called love of God. This love is the ultimate goal of the living
entities. One should, therefore, take to Krsna consciousness directly.
That is the message of this Seventeenth Chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Seventeenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Divisions of Faith.