Chapter 6
Sankhya-yoga
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
anasritah karma-phalam
karyam karma karoti yah
sa sannyasi ca yogi ca
na niragnir na cakriyah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Lord said; anasritah--without shelter; karma-
phalam--the result of work; karyam--obligatory; karma--work; karoti--
performs; yah--one who; sah--he; sannyasi--in the renounced order; ca--
also; yogi--mystic; ca--also; na--not; nih--without; agnih--fire; na--
nor; ca--also; akriyah--without duty.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: One who is unattached to the fruits of his work
and who works as he is obligated is in the renounced order of life, and
he is the true mystic: not he who lights no fire and performs no work.
PURPORT
In this chapter the Lord explains that the process of the eightfold
yoga system is a means to control the mind and the senses. However,
this is very difficult for people in general to perform, especially in
the Age of Kali. Although the eightfold yoga system is recommended in
this chapter, the Lord emphasizes that the process of karma-yoga, or
acting in Krsna consciousness, is better. Everyone acts in this world
to maintain his family and their paraphernalia, but no one is working
without some self-interest, some personal gratification, be it
concentrated or extended. The criterion of perfection is to act in
Krsna consciousness, and not with a view to enjoying the fruits of
work. To act in Krsna consciousness is the duty of every living entity
because all are constitutionally parts and parcels of the Supreme. The
parts of the body work for the satisfaction of the whole body. The
limbs of the body do not act for self-satisfaction but for the
satisfaction of the complete whole. Similarly, the living entity who
acts for satisfaction of the supreme whole and not for personal
satisfaction is the perfect sannyasi, the perfect yogi.
The sannyasis sometimes artificially think that they have become
liberated from all material duties, and therefore they cease to perform
agnihotra yajnas (fire sacrifices), but actually they are self-
interested because their goal is becoming one with the impersonal
Brahman. Such a desire is greater than any material desire, but it is
not without self-interest. Similarly, the mystic yogi who practices the
yoga system with half-open eyes, ceasing all material activities,
desires some satisfaction for his personal self. But a person acting in
Krsna consciousness works for the satisfaction of the whole, without
self-interest. A Krsna conscious person has no desire for self-
satisfaction. His criterion of success is the satisfaction of Krsna,
and thus he is the perfect sannyasi, or perfect yogi. Lord Caitanya,
the highest perfectional symbol of renunciation, prays in this way:
na dhanam na janam na sundarim
kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye
mama janmani janmanisvare
bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi
"O Almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor to enjoy
beautiful women. Nor do I want any number of followers. What I want
only is the causeless mercy of Your devotional service in my life,
birth after birth."
TEXT 2
yam sannyasam iti prahur
yogam tam viddhi pandava
na hy asannyasta-sankalpo
yogi bhavati kascana
SYNONYMS
yam--what; sannyasam--renunciation; iti--thus; prahuh--they say; yogam-
-linking with the Supreme; tam--that; viddhi--you must know; pandava--O
son of Pandu; na--never; hi--certainly; asannyasta--without giving up;
sankalpah--self-satisfaction; yogi--a mystic transcendentalist;
bhavati--becomes; kascana--anyone.
TRANSLATION
What is called renunciation is the same as yoga, or linking oneself
with the Supreme, for no one can become a yogi unless he renounces the
desire for sense gratification.
PURPORT
Real sannyasa-yoga or bhakti means that one should know his
constitutional position as the living entity, and act accordingly. The
living entity has no separate independent identity. He is the marginal
energy of the Supreme. When he is entrapped by material energy, he is
conditioned, and when he is Krsna conscious, or aware of the spiritual
energy, then he is in his real and natural state of life. Therefore,
when one is in complete knowledge, one ceases all material sense
gratification, or renounces all kinds of sense gratificatory
activities. This is practiced by the yogis who restrain the senses from
material attachment. But a person in Krsna consciousness has no
opportunity to engage his senses in anything which is not for the
purpose of Krsna. Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is simultaneously
a sannyasi and a yogi. The purpose of knowledge and of restraining the
senses, as prescribed in the jnana and yoga processes, is automatically
served in Krsna consciousness. If one is unable to give up the
activities of his selfish nature, then jnana and yoga are of no avail.
The real aim is for a living entity to give up all selfish satisfaction
and to be prepared to satisfy the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person has
no desire for any kind of self-enjoyment. He is always engaged for the
enjoyment of the Supreme. One who has no information of the Supreme
must therefore be engaged in self-satisfaction, because no one can
stand on the platform of inactivity. All purposes are perfectly served
by the practice of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 3
aruruksor muner yogam
karma karanam ucyate
yogarudhasya tasyaiva
samah karanam ucyate
SYNONYMS
aruruksoh--of one who has just begun yoga; muneh--of the sage; yogam--
the eightfold yoga system; karma--work; karanam--the cause; ucyate--is
said to be; yoga--eightfold yoga; arudhasya--of one who has attained;
tasya--his; eva--certainly; samah--cessation of all material
activities; karanam--the cause; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
For one who is a neophyte in the eightfold yoga system, work is said to
be the means; and for one who has already attained to yoga, cessation
of all material activities is said to be the means.
PURPORT
The process of linking oneself with the Supreme is called yoga, which
may be compared to a ladder for attaining the topmost spiritual
realization. This ladder begins from the lowest material condition of
the living entity and rises up to perfect self-realization in pure
spiritual life. According to various elevations, different parts of the
ladder are known by different names. But all in all, the complete
ladder is called yoga and may be divided into three parts, namely
jnana-yoga, dhyana-yoga and bhakti-yoga. The beginning of the ladder is
called the yogaruruksu stage, and the highest rung is called yogarudha.
Concerning the eightfold yoga system, attempts in the beginning to
enter into meditation through regulative principles of life and
practice of different sitting postures (which are more or less bodily
exercises) are considered fruitive material activities. All such
activities lead to achieving perfect mental equilibrium to control the
senses. When one is accomplished in the practice of meditation, he
ceases all disturbing mental activities.
A Krsna conscious person is, however, situated from the beginning on
the platform of meditation because he always thinks of Krsna. And,
being constantly engaged in the service of Krsna, he is considered to
have ceased all material activities.
TEXT 4
yada hi nendriyarthesu
na karmasv anusajjate
sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi
yogarudhas tadocyate
SYNONYMS
yada--when; 
hi--certainly; 
na--not; 
indriya-arthesu--in 
sense
gratification; na--never; karmasu--in fruitive activities; anusajjate--
does necessarily engage; sarva-sankalpa--all material desires;
sannyasi--renouncer; yoga-arudhah--elevated in yoga; tada--at that
time; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
A person is said to be have attained to yoga when, having renounced all
material desires, he neither acts for sense gratification nor engages
in fruitive activities.
PURPORT
When a person is fully engaged in the transcendental loving service of
the Lord, he is pleased in himself, and thus he is no longer engaged in
sense gratification or in fruitive activities. Otherwise, one must be
engaged in sense gratification, since one cannot live without
engagement. Without Krsna consciousness, one must be always seeking
self-centered or extended selfish activities. But a Krsna conscious
person can do everything for the satisfaction of Krsna and thereby be
perfectly detached from sense gratification. One who has no such
realization must mechanically try to escape material desires before
being elevated to the top rung of the yoga ladder.
TEXT 5
uddhared atmanatmanam
natmanam avasadayet
atmaiva hy atmano bandhur
atmaiva ripur atmanah
SYNONYMS
uddharet--one must deliver; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the
conditioned soul; na--never; atmanam--the conditioned soul; avasadayet-
-put into degradation; atma--mind; eva--certainly; hi--indeed; atmanah-
-of the conditioned soul; bandhuh--friend; atma--mind; eva--certainly;
ripuh--enemy; atmanah--of the conditioned soul.
TRANSLATION
A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself. The
mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.
PURPORT
The word atma denotes body, mind and soul--depending upon different
circumstances. In the yoga system, the mind and the conditioned soul
are especially important. Since the mind is the central point of yoga
practice, atma refers here to the mind. The purpose of the yoga system
is to control the mind and to draw it away from attachment to sense
objects. It is stressed herein that the mind must be so trained that it
can deliver the conditioned soul from the mire of nescience. In
material existence one is subjected to the influence of the mind and
the senses. In fact, the pure soul is entangled in the material world
because of the mind's ego which desires to lord it over material
nature. Therefore, the mind should be trained so that it will not be
attracted by the glitter of material nature, and in this way the
conditioned soul may be saved. One should not degrade oneself by
attraction to sense objects. The more one is attracted by sense
objects, the more one becomes entangled in material existence. The best
way to disentangle oneself is to always engage the mind in Krsna
consciousness. The word hi is used for emphasizing this point, i.e.,
that one must do this. It is also said:
mana eva manusyanam
karanam bandha-moksayoh
bandhaya visayasango
muktyai nirvisayam manah
"For man, mind is the cause of bondage and mind is the cause of
liberation. Mind absorbed in sense objects is the cause of bondage, and
mind detached from the sense objects is the cause of liberation."
(Amrta-bindu Upanisad 2) Therefore, the mind which is always engaged in
Krsna consciousness is the cause of supreme liberation.
TEXT 6
bandhur atmatmanas tasya
yenatmaivatmana jitah
anatmanas tu satrutve
vartetatmaiva satru-vat
SYNONYMS
bandhuh--friend; atma--mind; atmanah--of the living entity; tasya--of
him; yena--by whom; atma--mind; eva--certainly; atmana--by the living
entity; jitah--conquered; anatmanah--of one who has failed to control
the mind; tu--but; satrutve--because of enmity; varteta--remains; atma
eva--the very mind; satru-vat--as an enemy.
TRANSLATION
For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends;
but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will be the greatest
enemy.
PURPORT
The purpose of practicing eightfold yoga is to control the mind in
order to make it a friend in discharging the human mission. Unless the
mind is controlled, the practice of yoga (for show) is simply a waste
of time. One who cannot control his mind lives always with the greatest
enemy, and thus his life and its mission are spoiled. The
constitutional position of the living entity is to carry out the order
of the superior. As long as one's mind remains an unconquered enemy,
one has to serve the dictations of lust, anger, avarice, illusion, etc.
But when the mind is conquered, one voluntarily agrees to abide by the
dictation of the Personality of Godhead, who is situated within the
heart of everyone as Paramatma. Real yoga practice entails meeting the
Paramatma within the heart and then following His dictation. For one
who takes to Krsna consciousness directly, perfect surrender to the
dictation of the Lord follows automatically.
TEXT 7
jitatmanah prasantasya
paramatma samahitah
sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu
tatha manapamanayoh
SYNONYMS
jita-atmanah--of one who has conquered his mind; prasantasya--of who
has attained tranquillity by such control over the mind; parama-atma--
the Supersoul; samahitah--approached completely; sita--cold; usna--
heat; sukha--in happiness; duhkhesu--in distress; tatha--also; mana--
honor; apamanayoh--and dishonor.
TRANSLATION
For one who has conquered the mind, the Supersoul is already reached,
for he has attained tranquillity. To such a man happiness and distress,
heat and cold, honor and dishonor are all the same.
PURPORT
Actually, every living entity is intended to abide by the dictation of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone's heart
as Paramatma. When the mind is misled by the external illusory energy,
one becomes entangled in material activities. Therefore, as soon as
one's mind is controlled through one of the yoga systems, one is to be
considered as having already reached the destination. One has to abide
by superior dictation. When one's mind is fixed on the superior nature,
he has no other alternative but to follow the dictation of the Supreme.
The mind must admit some superior dictation and follow it. The effect
of controlling the mind is that one automatically follows the dictation
of the Paramatma or Supersoul. Because this transcendental position is
at once achieved by one who is in Krsna consciousness, the devotee of
the Lord is unaffected by the dualities of material existence, namely
distress and happiness, cold and heat, etc. This state is practical
samadhi, or absorption in the Supreme.
TEXT 8
jnana-vijnana-trptatma
kuta-stho vijitendriyah
yukta ity ucyate yogi
sama-lostrasma-kancanah
SYNONYMS
jnana--acquired knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; trpta--
satisfied; atma--living entity; kuta-sthah--spiritually situated;
vijita-indriyah--sensually controlled; yuktah--competent for self-
realization; iti--thus; ucyate--is said; yogi--the mystic; sama--
equipoised; lostra--pebbles; asma--stone; kancanah--gold.
TRANSLATION
A person is said to be established in self-realization and is called a
yogi [or mystic] when he is fully satisfied by virtue of acquired
knowledge and realization. Such a person is situated in transcendence
and is self-controlled. He sees everything--whether it be pebbles,
stones or gold--as the same.
PURPORT
Book knowledge without realization of the Supreme Truth is useless.
This is stated as follows:
atah sri-krsna-namadi
na bhaved grahyam indriyaih
sevonmukhe hi jihvadau
svayam eva sphuraty adah
"No one can understand the transcendental nature of the name, form,
quality and pastimes of Sri Krsna through his materially contaminated
senses. Only when one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental
service to the Lord are the transcendental name, form, quality and
pastimes of the Lord revealed to him." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234)
This Bhagavad-gita is the science of Krsna consciousness. No one can
become Krsna conscious simply by mundane scholarship. One must be
fortunate enough to associate with a person who is in pure
consciousness. A Krsna conscious person has realized knowledge, by the
grace of Krsna, because he is satisfied with pure devotional service.
By realized knowledge, one becomes perfect. By transcendental knowledge
one can remain steady in his convictions, but by mere academic
knowledge one can be easily deluded and confused by apparent
contradictions. It is the realized soul who is actually self-controlled
because he is surrendered to Krsna. He is transcendental because he has
nothing to do with mundane scholarship. For him mundane scholarship and
mental speculation, which may be as good as gold to others, are of no
greater value than pebbles or stones.
TEXT 9
suhrn-mitrary-udasina-
madhyastha-dvesya-bandhusu
sadhusv api ca papesu
sama-buddhir visisyate
SYNONYMS
su-hrt--by nature a well-wisher; mitra--benefactor with affection; ari-
-enemy; udasina--neutral between belligerents; madhya-stha--mediator
between the belligerents; dvesya--envious; bandhusu--among relatives or
well-wishers; sadhusu--unto the pious; api--as well as; ca--and;
papesu--unto the sinners; sama-buddhih--having equal intelligence;
visisyate--is far advanced.
TRANSLATION
A person is said to be still further advanced when he regards all--the
honest well-wisher, friends and enemies, the envious,  the pious, the
sinner and those who are indifferent and impartial--with an equal mind.
TEXT 10
yogi yunjita satatam
atmanam rahasi sthitah
ekaki yata-cittatma
nirasir aparigrahah
SYNONYMS
yogi--a transcendentalist; yunjita--must concentrate in Krsna
consciousness; satatam--constantly; atmanam--himself (by the body, mind
and self); rahasi--in a secluded place; sthitah--being so situated;
ekaki--alone; yata-citta-atma--always careful in mind; nirasih--without
being attracted by anything else; aparigrahah--free from the feeling of
possessiveness.
TRANSLATION
A transcendentalist should always try to concentrate his mind on the
Supreme Self; he should live alone in a secluded place and should
always carefully control his mind. He should be free from desires and
feelings of possessiveness.
PURPORT
Krsna is realized in different degrees as Brahman, Paramatma and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna consciousness means, concisely,
to be always engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
But those who are attached to the impersonal Brahman or the localized
Supersoul are also partially Krsna conscious, because impersonal
Brahman is the spiritual ray of Krsna and Supersoul is the all-
pervading partial expansion of Krsna. Thus the impersonalist and the
meditator are also indirectly Krsna conscious. A directly Krsna
conscious person is the topmost transcendentalist because such a
devotee knows what is meant by Brahman or Paramatma. His knowledge of
the Absolute Truth is perfect, whereas the impersonalist and the
meditative yogi are imperfectly Krsna conscious.
Nevertheless, all of these are instructed herewith to be constantly
engaged in their particular pursuits so that they may come to the
highest perfection sooner or later. The first business of a
transcendentalist is to keep the mind always on Krsna. One should
always think of Krsna and not forget Him even for a moment.
Concentration of the mind on the Supreme is called samadhi, or trance.
In order to concentrate the mind, one should always remain in seclusion
and avoid disturbance by external objects. He should be very careful to
accept favorable and reject unfavorable conditions that affect his
realization. And, in perfect determination, he should not hanker after
unnecessary material things that entangle him by feelings of
possessiveness.
All these perfections and precautions are perfectly executed when one
is directly in Krsna consciousness, because direct Krsna consciousness
means self-abnegation, wherein there is very little chance for material
possessiveness. Srila Rupa Gosvami characterizes Krsna consciousness in
this way:
anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatah
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate
prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyam phalgu kathyate
"When one is not attached to anything, but at the same time accepts
everything in relation to Krsna, one is rightly situated above
possessiveness. On the other hand, one who rejects everything without
knowledge of its relationship to Krsna is not as complete in his
renunciation." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255-256)
A Krsna conscious person well knows that everything belongs to Krsna,
and thus he is always free from feelings of personal possession. As
such, he has no hankering for anything on his own personal account. He
knows how to accept things in favor of Krsna consciousness and how to
reject things unfavorable to Krsna consciousness. He is always aloof
from material things because he is always transcendental, and he is
always alone, having nothing to do with persons not in Krsna
consciousness. Therefore a person in Krsna consciousness is the perfect
yogi.
TEXTS 11-12
sucau dese pratisthapya
sthiram asanam atmanah
naty-ucchritam nati-nicam
cailajina-kusottaram
tatraikagram manah krtva
yata-cittendriya-kriyah
upavisyasane yunjyad
yogam atma-visuddhaye
SYNONYMS
sucau--in a sanctified; dese--in the land; pratisthapya--placing;
sthiram--firm; asanam--seat; atmanah--self-dependent; na--not; ati--
too; ucchritam--high; na--nor; ati--too; nicam--low; caila-ajina--soft
cloth and deerskin; kusottaram--kusa grass; tatra--thereupon; eka-
agram--one attention; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; yata-citta--
controlling the mind; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; upavisya--
sitting on; asane--on the seat; yunjyat--execute; yogam--yoga practice;
atma--heart; visuddhaye--for clarifying.
TRANSLATION
To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay kusa
grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a soft cloth.
The seat should neither be too high nor too low and should be situated
in a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it very firmly and
should practice yoga by controlling the mind and the senses, purifying
the heart and fixing the mind on one point.
PURPORT
"Sacred place" refers to places of pilgrimage. In India the yogis, the
transcendentalists or the devotees all leave home and reside in sacred
places such as Prayaga, Mathura, Vrndavana, Hrsikesa and Hardwar and in
solitude practice yoga where the sacred rivers like the Yamuna and the
Ganges flow. But often this is not possible, especially for Westerners.
The so-called yoga societies in big cities may be successful in earning
material benefit, but they are not at all suitable for the actual
practice of yoga. One who is not self-controlled and whose mind is not
undisturbed cannot practice meditation. Therefore, in the Brhan-
naradiya Purana it is said that in the Kali-yuga (the present yuga, or
age) when people in general are short-lived, slow in spiritual
realization and always disturbed by various anxieties, the best means
of spiritual realization is chanting the holy name of the Lord.
harer nama harer nama
harer namaiva kevalam
kalau nasty eva nasty eva
nasty eva gatir anyatha
"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance is
chanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no
other way. There is no other way."
TEXTS 13-14
samam kaya-siro-grivam
dharayann acalam sthirah
sampreksya nasikagram svam
disas canavalokayan
prasantatma vigata-bhir
brahmacari-vrate sthitah
manah samyamya mac-citto
yukta asita mat-parah
SYNONYMS
samam--straight; kaya-sirah--body and head; grivam--neck; dharayan--
holding; acalam--unmoved; sthirah--still; sampreksya--looking; nasika--
nose; agram--tip; svam--own; disah--all sides; ca--also; anavalokayan--
not seeing; prasanta--unagitated; atma--mind; vigata-bhih--devoid of
fear; brahmacari-vrate--in the vow of celibacy; sthitah--situated;
manah--mind; samyamya--completely subduing; mat--upon Me (Krsna);
cittah--concentrated; yuktah--the actual yogi; asita--being so; mat--
unto Me; parah--the ultimate goal.
TRANSLATION
One should hold one's body, neck and head erect in a straight line and
stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus, with an unagitated,
subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one should
meditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the ultimate goal of
life.
PURPORT
The goal of life is to know Krsna, who is situated within the heart of
every living being as Paramatma, the four-handed Visnu form. The yoga
process is practiced in order to discover and see this localized form
of Visnu, and not for any other purpose. The localized visnu-murti is
the plenary representation of Krsna dwelling within one's heart. One
who has no program to realize this visnu-murti is uselessly engaged in
mock-yoga practice and is certainly wasting his time. Krsna is the
ultimate goal of life, and the visnu-murti situated in one's heart is
the object of yoga practice. To realize this visnu-murti within the
heart, one has to observe complete abstinence from sex life; therefore
one has to leave home and live alone in a secluded place, remaining
seated as mentioned above. One cannot enjoy sex life daily at home or
elsewhere and attend a so-called yoga class and thus become a yogi. One
has to practice controlling the mind and avoiding all kinds of sense
gratification, of which sex life is the chief. In the rules of celibacy
written by the great sage Yajnavalkya it is said:
karmana manasa vaca
sarvavasthasu sarvada
sarvatra maithuna-tyago
brahmacaryam pracaksate
"The vow of brahmacarya is meant to help one completely abstain from
sex indulgence in work, words and mind--at all times, under all
circumstances, and in all places." No one can perform correct yoga
practice through sex indulgence. Brahmacarya is taught, therefore, from
childhood when one has no knowledge of sex life. Children at the age of
five are sent to the guru-kula, or the place of the spiritual master,
and the master trains the young boys in the strict discipline of
becoming brahmacaris. Without such practice, no one can make
advancement in any yoga, whether it be dhyana, jnana or bhakti. One
who, however, follows the rules and regulations of married life, having
a sexual relationship only with his wife (and that also under
regulation), is also called brahmacari. Such a restrained householder
brahmacari may be accepted in the bhakti school, but the jnana and
dhyana schools do not even admit householder brahmacaris. They require
complete abstinence without compromise. In the bhakti school, a
householder brahmacari is allowed controlled sex life because the cult
of bhakti-yoga is so powerful that one automatically loses sexual
attraction, being engaged in the superior service of the Lord. In the
Bhagavad-gita (2.59) it is said:
visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinah
rasa-varjam raso 'py asya
param drstva nivartate
Whereas others are forced to restrain themselves from sense
gratification, a devotee of the Lord automatically refrains because of
superior taste. Other than the devotee, no one has any information of
that superior taste.
Vigata-bhih. One cannot be fearless unless one is fully in Krsna
consciousness. A conditioned soul is fearful due to his perverted
memory, his forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. The
Bhagavatam (11.2.37) says, bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syad isad
apetasya viparyayo 'smrtih. Krsna consciousness is the only basis for
fearlessness. Therefore, perfect practice is possible for a person who
is Krsna conscious. And since the ultimate goal of yoga practice is to
see the Lord within, a Krsna conscious person is already the best of
all yogis. The principles of the yoga system mentioned herein are
different from those of the popular so-called yoga societies.
TEXT 15
yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi niyata-manasah
santim nirvana-paramam
mat-samstham adhigacchati
SYNONYMS
yunjan--practicing like this; evam--as mentioned above; sada--
constantly; 
atmanam--body, 
mind 
and 
soul; 
yogi--the 
mystic
transcendentalist; niyata-manasah--regulated mind; santim--peace;
nirvana-paramam--cessation of material existence; mat-samstham--in the
spiritual sky (the kingdom of God); adhigacchati--does attain.
TRANSLATION
Thus practicing control of the body, mind and activities, the mystic
transcendentalist attains to the kingdom of God [or the abode of Krsna]
by cessation of material existence.
PURPORT
The ultimate goal in practicing yoga is now clearly explained. Yoga
practice is not meant for attaining any kind of material facility; it
is to enable the cessation of all material existence. One who seeks an
improvement in health or aspires after material perfection is no yogi
according to Bhagavad-gita. Nor does cessation of material existence
entail one's entering into "the void," which is only a myth. There is
no void anywhere within the creation of the Lord. Rather, the cessation
of material existence enables one to enter into the spiritual sky, the
abode of the Lord. The abode of the Lord is also clearly described in
the Bhagavad-gita as that place where there is no need of sun, moon or
electricity. All the planets in the spiritual kingdom are self-
illuminated like the sun in the material sky. The kingdom of God is
everywhere, but the spiritual sky and the planets thereof are called
param dhama, or superior abodes.
A consummate yogi, who is perfect in understanding Lord Krsna, as is
clearly stated herein (mat-cittah, mat-parah, mat-sthanam) by the Lord
Himself, can attain real peace and can ultimately reach His supreme
abode, the Krsnaloka, known as Goloka Vrndavana. In the Brahma-samhita
(5.37) it is clearly stated, (goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhutah)
that the Lord, although residing always in His abode called Goloka, is
the all-pervading Brahman and the localized Paramatma as well by dint
of His superior spiritual energies. No one can reach the spiritual sky
(Vaikuntha) or enter into the Lord's eternal abode (Goloka Vrndavana)
without the proper understanding of Krsna and His plenary expansion
Visnu. Therefore a person working in Krsna consciousness is the perfect
yogi, because his mind is always absorbed in Krsna's activities (sa vai
manah krsna-padaravindayoh). In the Vedas also (Svetasvatara Upanisad
3.8) we learn, tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti: "One can overcome the path
of birth and death only by understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna." In other words, perfection of the yoga system is the
attainment of freedom from material existence and not some magical
jugglery or gymnastic feats to befool innocent people.
TEXT 16
naty-asnatas 'tu yogo 'sti
na caikantam anasnatah
na cati-svapna-silasya
jagrato naiva carjuna
SYNONYMS
na--never; ati--too much; asnatah--of one who eats so; tu--but; yogah--
linking with the Supreme; asti--there is; na--nor; ca--also; ekantam--
very low; anasnatah--abstaining from eating; na--nor; ca--also; ati--
too much; svapna-silasya--of one who sleeps too much; jagratah--or one
who keeps night watch too much; na--not; eva--ever; ca--and; arjuna--O
Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
There is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one eats
too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough.
PURPORT
Regulation of diet and sleep is recommended herein for the yogis. Too
much eating means eating more than is required to keep the body and
soul together. There is no need for men to eat animals, because there
is an ample supply of grains, vegetables, fruits and milk. Such simple
foodstuff is considered to be in the mode of goodness according to the
Bhagavad-gita. Animal food is for those in the mode of ignorance.
Therefore, those who indulge in animal food, drinking, smoking and
eating food which is not first offered to Krsna will suffer sinful
reactions because of eating only polluted things. Bhunjate te tv agham
papa ye pacanty atma-karanat. Anyone who eats for sense pleasure, or
cooks for himself, not offering his food to Krsna, eats only sin. One
who eats sin and eats more than is allotted to him cannot execute
perfect yoga. It is best that one eat only the remnants of foodstuff
offered to Krsna. A person in Krsna consciousness does not eat anything
which is not first offered to Krsna. Therefore, only the Krsna
conscious person can attain perfection in yoga practice. Nor can one
who artificially abstains from eating, manufacturing his own personal
process of fasting, practice yoga. The Krsna conscious person observes
fasting as it is recommended in the scriptures. He does not fast or eat
more than is required, and he is thus competent to perform yoga
practice. One who eats more than required will dream very much while
sleeping, and he must consequently sleep more than is required. One
should not sleep more than six hours daily. One who sleeps more than
six hours out of twenty-four is certainly influenced by the mode of
ignorance. A person in the mode of ignorance is lazy and prone to sleep
a great deal. Such a person cannot perform yoga.
TEXT 17
yuktahara-viharasya
yukta-cestasya karmasu
yukta-svapnavabodhasya
yogo bhavati duhkha-ha
SYNONYMS
yukta--regulated; ahara--eating; viharasya--recreation; yukta--
regulated; cestasya--of one who works for maintenance; karmasu--in
discharging duties; yukta--regulated; svapna-avabodhasya--regulated
sleep and wakefulness; yogah--practice of yoga; bhavati--becomes;
duhkha-ha--diminishing pains.
TRANSLATION
He who is temperate in his habits of eating, sleeping, working and
recreation can mitigate all material pains by practicing the yoga
system.
PURPORT
Extravagance in the matter of eating, sleeping, defending and mating--
which are demands of the body--can block advancement in the practice of
yoga. As far as eating is concerned, it can be regulated only when one
is practiced to take and accept prasadam, sanctified food. Lord Krsna
is offered, according to the Bhagavad-gita (9.26), vegetables, flowers,
fruits, grains, milk, etc. In this way, a person in Krsna consciousness
becomes automatically trained not to accept food not meant for human
consumption, or which not in the category of goodness. As far as
sleeping is concerned, a Krsna conscious person is always alert in the
discharge of his duties in Krsna consciousness, and therefore any
unnecessary time spent sleeping is considered a great loss. Avyartha-
kalatvam: a Krsna conscious person cannot bear to pass a minute of his
life without being engaged in the service of the Lord. Therefore, his
sleeping is kept to a minimum. His ideal in this respect is Srila Rupa
Gosvami, who was always engaged in the service of Krsna and who could
not sleep more than two hours a day, and sometimes not even that.
Thakura Haridasa would not even accept prasadam nor even sleep for a
moment without finishing his daily routine of chanting with his beads
three hundred thousand names. As far as work is concerned, a Krsna
conscious person does not do anything which is not connected with
Krsna's interest, and thus his work is always regulated and is
untainted by sense gratification. Since there is no question of sense
gratification, there is no material leisure for a person in Krsna
consciousness. And because he is regulated in all his work, speech,
sleep, wakefulness and all other bodily activities, there is no
material misery for him.
TEXT 18
yada viniyatam cittam
atmany evavatisthate
nisprhah sarva-kamebhyo
yukta ity ucyate tada
SYNONYMS
yada--when; viniyatam--particularly disciplined; cittam--the mind and
its activities; atmani--in the transcendence; eva--certainly;
avatisthate--becomes situated; nisprhah--devoid of desire; sarva--all
kinds of; kamebhyah--material desires; yuktah--well situated in yoga;
iti--thus; ucyate--is said to be; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATION
When the yogi, by practice of yoga, disciplines his mental activities
and becomes situated in transcendence--devoid of all material desires--
he is said to have attained yoga.
PURPORT
The activities of the yogi are distinguished from those of an ordinary
person by his characteristic cessation from all kinds of material
desires--of which sex is the chief. A perfect yogi is so well
disciplined in the activities of the mind that he can no longer be
disturbed by any kind of material desire. This perfectional stage can
automatically be attained by persons in Krsna consciousness, as stated
in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):
sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane
karau harer mandira-marjanadisu
srutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamam
ghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhe
srimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite
padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandane
kamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyaya
yathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih
"King Ambarisa first of all engaged his mind on the lotus feet of Lord
Krsna; then, one after another, he engaged his words in describing the
transcendental qualities of the Lord, his hands in mopping the temple
of the Lord, his ears in hearing of the activities of the Lord, his
eyes in seeing the transcendental forms of the Lord, his body in
touching the bodies of the devotees, his sense of smell in smelling the
scents of the lotus flower offered to the Lord, his tongue in tasting
the tulasi leaf offered at the lotus feet of the Lord, his legs in
going to places of pilgrimage and the temple of the Lord, his head in
offering obeisances unto the Lord and his desires in executing the
mission of the Lord. All these transcendental activities are quite
befitting a pure devotee."
This transcendental stage may be inexpressible subjectively by the
followers of the impersonalist path, but it becomes very easy and
practical for a person in Krsna consciousness, as is apparent in the
above description of the engagements of Maharaja Ambarisa. Unless the
mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord by constant remembrance,
such transcendental engagements are not practical. In the devotional
service of the Lord, therefore, these prescribed activities are called
arcana, or engaging all the senses in the service of the Lord. The
senses and the mind require engagements. Simple abnegation is not
practical. Therefore, for people in general--especially those who are
not in the renounced order of life--transcendental engagement of the
senses and the mind as described above is the perfect process for
transcendental achievement, which is called yukta in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 19
yatha dipo nivata-stho
nengate sopama smrta
yogino yata-cittasya
yunjato yogam atmanah
SYNONYMS
yatha--as; dipah--a lamp; nivata-sthah--in a place without wind; na--
does not; ingate--waver; sa upama--compared to that; smrta--likened;
yoginah--of the yogi; yata-cittasya--whose mind is controlled;
yunjatah--constantly engaged in; yogam--meditation; atmanah--on
transcendence.
TRANSLATION
As a lamp in a windless place does not waver, so the transcendentalist,
whose mind is controlled, remains always steady in his meditation on
the transcendent self.
PURPORT
A truly Krsna conscious person, always absorbed in transcendence, in
constant undisturbed meditation on his worshipable Lord, is as steady
as a lamp in a windless place.
TEXTS 20-23
yatroparamate cittam
niruddham yoga-sevaya
yatra caivatmanatmanam
pasyann atmani tusyati
sukham atyantikam yat tad
buddhi-grahyam atindriyam
vetti yatra na caivayam
sthitas calati tattvatah
yam labdhva caparam labham
manyate nadhikam tatah
yasmin sthito na duhkhena
gurunapi vicalyate
tam vidyad duhkha-samyoga-
viyogam yoga-samjnitam
SYNONYMS
yatra--in that state of affairs; uparamate--when one feels
transcendental happiness; cittam--mental activities; niruddham--
restrained from matter; yoga-sevaya--by performance of yoga; yatra--in
that; ca--also; eva--certainly; atmana--by the pure mind; atmanam--the
self; pasyan--realizing the position; atmani--in the self; tusyati--
becomes satisfied; sukham--happiness; atyantikam--supreme; yat--in
which; 
tat--that; 
buddhi--intelligence; 
grahyam--accessible;
atindriyam--transcendental; vetti--knows; yatra--wherein; na--never;
ca--also; eva--certainly; ayam--in this; sthitah--situated; calati--
moves; tattvatah--from the truth; yam--that which; labdhva--by
attainment; ca--also; aparam--any other; labham--gain; manyate--does
not mind; na--never; adhikam--more than that; tatah--from that; yasmin-
-in which; sthitah--being situated; na--never; duhkhena--by miseries;
guruna api--even though very difficult; vicalyate--becomes shaken; tam-
-that; vidyat--you must know; duhkha-samyoga--miseries of material
contact; viyogam--extermination; yoga-samjnitam--trance in yoga.
TRANSLATION
The stage of perfection is called trance, or samadhi, when one's mind
is completely restrained from material mental activities by practice of
yoga. This is characterized by one's ability to see the self by the
pure mind and to relish and rejoice in the self. In that joyous state,
one is situated in boundless transcendental happiness and enjoys
himself through transcendental senses. Established thus, one never
departs from the truth and upon gaining this he thinks there is no
greater gain. Being situated in such a position, one is never shaken,
even in the midst of greatest difficulty. This indeed is actual freedom
from all miseries arising from material contact.
PURPORT
By practice of yoga one becomes gradually detached from material
concepts. This is the primary characteristic of the yoga principle. And
after this, one becomes situated in trance, or samadhi, which means
that the yogi realizes the Supersoul through transcendental mind and
intelligence, without any of the misgivings of identifying the self
with the Superself. Yoga practice is more or less based on the
principles of the Patanjali system. Some unauthorized commentators try
to identify the individual soul with the Supersoul, and the monists
think this to be liberation, but they do not understand the real
purpose of the Patanjali system of yoga. There is an acceptance of
transcendental pleasure in the Patanjali system, but the monists do not
accept this transcendental pleasure, out of fear of jeopardizing the
theory of oneness. The duality of knowledge and knower is not accepted
by the nondualist, but in this verse transcendental pleasure--realized
through transcendental senses--is accepted. And this is corroborated by
Patanjali Muni, the famous exponent of the yoga system. The great sage
declares in his Yoga-sutras (3.34): purusartha-sunyanam gunanam
pratiprasavah kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktir iti.
This citi-sakti, or internal potency, is transcendental. Purusartha
means material religiosity, economic development, sense gratification
and, at the end, the attempt to become one with the Supreme. This
"oneness with the Supreme" is called kaivalyam by the monist. But
according to Patanjali, this kaivalyam is an internal, or
transcendental, potency by which the living entity becomes aware of his
constitutional position. In the words of Lord Caitanya, this state of
affairs is called ceto-darpana-marjanam, or clearance of the impure
mirror of the mind. This "clearance" is actually liberation, or bhava-
maha-davagni-nirvapanam. The theory of nirvana--also preliminary--
corresponds with this principle. In the Bhagavatam (2.10.6) this is
called svarupena vyavasthitih. The Bhagavad-gita also confirms this
situation in this verse.
After nirvana, or material cessation, there is the manifestation of
spiritual activities, or devotional service to the Lord, known as Krsna
consciousness. In the words of the Bhagavatam, svarupena vyavasthitih:
this is the "real life of the living entity." Maya, or illusion, is the
condition of spiritual life contaminated by material infection.
Liberation from this material infection does not mean destruction of
the original eternal position of the living entity. Patanjali also
accepts this by his words kaivalyam svarupa-pratistha va citi-saktir
iti. This citi-sakti, or transcendental pleasure, is real life. This is
confirmed in the Vedanta-sutra (1.1.12) as ananda-mayo 'bhyasat. This
natural transcendental pleasure is the ultimate goal of yoga and is
easily achieved by execution of devotional service, or bhakti-yoga.
Bhakti-yoga will be vividly described in the Seventh Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita.
In the yoga system, as described in this chapter, there are two kinds
of samadhi, called samprajnata-samadhi and asamprajnata-samadhi. When
one becomes situated in the transcendental position by various
philosophical researches, it is called samprajnata-samadhi. In the
asamprajnata-samadhi there is no longer any connection with mundane
pleasure, for one is then transcendental to all sorts of happiness
derived from the senses. When the yogi is once situated in that
transcendental position, he is never shaken from it. Unless the yogi is
able to reach this position, he is unsuccessful. Today's so-called yoga
practice, which involves various sense pleasures, is contradictory. A
yogi indulging in sex and intoxication is a mockery. Even those yogis
who are attracted by the siddhis (perfections) in the process of yoga
are not perfectly situated. If the yogis are attracted by the by-
products of yoga, then they cannot attain the stage of perfection, as
is stated in this verse. Persons, therefore, indulging in the make-show
practice of gymnastic feats or siddhis should know that the aim of yoga
is lost in that way.
The best practice of yoga in this age is Krsna consciousness, which is
not baffling. A Krsna conscious person is so happy in his occupation
that he does not aspire after any other happiness. There are many
impediments especially in this age of hypocrisy, to practicing hatha-
yoga, dhyana-yoga and jnana-yoga, but there is no such problem in
executing karma-yoga or bhakti-yoga.
As long as the material body exists, one has to meet the demands of the
body, namely eating, sleeping, defending and mating. But a person who
is in pure bhakti-yoga or in Krsna consciousness does not arouse the
senses while meeting the demands of the body. Rather, he accepts the
bare necessities of life, making the best use of a bad bargain, and
enjoys transcendental happiness in Krsna consciousness. He is callous
toward incidental occurrences--such as accidents, disease, scarcity and
even the death of a most dear relative--but he is always alert to
execute his duties in Krsna consciousness or bhakti-yoga. Accidents
never deviate him from his duty. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (2.14),
agamapayino 'nityas tams titiksasva bharata. He endures all such
incidental occurrences because he knows that they come and go and do
not affect his duties. In this way he achieves the highest perfection
in yoga practice.
TEXT 24
sa niscayena yoktavyo
yogo 'nirvinna-cetasa
sankalpa-prabhavan kamams
tyaktva sarvan asesatah
manasaivendriya-gramam
viniyamya samantatah
SYNONYMS
sah--that yoga system; niscayena--with firm determination; yoktavyah--
must be practiced; yogah--in such practice; anirvinna-cetasa--without
deviation; sankalpa--material desires; prabhavan--born of; kaman--sense
gratification; tyaktva--giving up; sarvan--all; asesatah--completely;
manasa--by the mind; eva--certainly; indriya-gramam--the full set of
senses; viniyamya--regulating; samantatah--from all sides.
TRANSLATION
One should engage oneself in the practice of yoga with undeviating
determination and faith. One should abandon, without exception, all
material desires born of false ego and thus control all the senses on
all sides by the mind.
PURPORT
The yoga practitioner should be determined and should patiently
prosecute the practice without deviation. One should be sure of success
at the end and pursue this course with great perseverance, not becoming
discouraged if there is any delay in the attainment of success. Success
is sure for the rigid practitioner. Regarding bhakti-yoga, Rupa Gosvami
says:
utsahan niscayad dhairyat
tat-tat-karma-pravartanat
sanga-tyagat sato vrtteh
sadbhir bhaktih prasidhyati
"The process of bhakti-yoga can be executed successfully with full-
hearted enthusiasm, perseverance, and determination by following the
prescribed duties in the association of devotees and by engaging
completely in activities of goodness." (Upadesamrta 3)
As for determination, one should follow the example of the sparrow who
lost her eggs in the waves of the ocean. A sparrow laid her eggs on the
shore of the ocean, but the big ocean carried away the eggs on its
waves. The sparrow became very upset and asked the ocean to return her
eggs. The ocean did not even consider her appeal. So the sparrow
decided to dry up the ocean. She began to pick out the water in her
small beak, and everyone laughed at her for her impossible
determination. The news of her activity spread, and at last Garuda, the
gigantic bird carrier of Lord Visnu, heard it. He became compassionate
toward his small sister bird, and so he came to see the sparrow. Garuda
was very pleased by the determination of the small sparrow, and he
promised to help. Thus Garuda at once asked the ocean to return her
eggs lest he himself take up the work of the sparrow. The ocean was
frightened at this, and returned the eggs. Thus the sparrow became
happy by the grace of Garuda.
Similarly, the practice of yoga, especially bhakti-yoga in Krsna
consciousness, may appear to be a very difficult job. But if anyone
follows the principles with great determination, the Lord will surely
help, for God helps those who help themselves.
TEXT 25
sanaih sanair uparamed
buddhya dhrti-grhitaya
atma-samstham manah krtva
na kincid api cintayet
SYNONYMS
sanaih--gradually; sanaih--step by step; uparamet--hesitated; buddhya--
by intelligence; dhrti-grhitaya--carrying the conviction; atma-
samstham--placed in transcendence; manah--mind; krtva--doing so; na--
not; kincit--anything else; api--even; cintayet--be thinking of.
TRANSLATION
Gradually, step by step, with full conviction, one should become
situated in trance by means of intelligence, and thus the mind should
be fixed on the self alone and should think of nothing else.
PURPORT
By proper conviction and intelligence one should gradually cease sense
activities. This is called pratyahara. The mind, being controlled by
conviction, meditation, and cessation of the senses, should be situated
in trance, or samadhi. At that time there is no longer any danger of
becoming engaged in the material conception of life. In other words,
although one is involved with matter as long as the material body
exists, one should not think about sense gratification. One should
think of no pleasure aside from the pleasure of the Supreme Self. This
state is easily attained by directly practicing Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 26
yato yato niscalati
manas cancalam asthiram
tatas tato niyamyaitad
atmany eva vasam nayet
SYNONYMS
yatah--whatever; yatah--wherever; niscalati--verily agitated; manah--
the mind; cancalam--flickering; asthiram--unsteady; tatah--from there;
tatah--and thereafter; niyamya--regulating; etat--this; atmani--in the
self; eva--certainly; vasam--control; nayet--must bring in.
TRANSLATION
From whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and
unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back under
the control of the self.
PURPORT
The nature of the mind is flickering and unsteady. But a self-realized
yogi has to control the mind; the mind should not control him. One who
controls the mind (and therefore the senses as well) is called gosvami,
or svami, and one who is controlled by the mind is called go-dasa, or
the servant of the senses. A gosvami knows the standard of sense
happiness. In transcendental sense happiness, the senses are engaged in
the service of Hrsikesa, or the supreme owner of the senses--Krsna.
Serving Krsna with purified senses is called Krsna consciousness. That
is the way of bringing the senses under full control. What is more,
that is the highest perfection of yoga practice.
TEXT 27
prasanta-manasam hy enam
yoginam sukham uttamam
upaiti santa-rajasam
brahma-bhutam akalmasam
SYNONYMS
prasanta--mind fixed on the lotus feet of Krsna; manasam--of one whose
mind is so fixed; hi--certainly; enam--this; yoginam--the yogi; sukham-
-happiness; uttamam--the highest; upaiti--attains; santa-rajasam--
pacified passion; brahma-bhutam--liberation by identification with the
Absolute; akalmasam--freed from all past sinful reaction.
TRANSLATION
The yogi whose mind is fixed on Me verily attains the highest
happiness. By virtue of his identity with Brahman, he is liberated; his
mind is peaceful, his passions are quieted, and he is freed from sin.
PURPORT
Brahma-bhuta is the state of being free from material contamination and
situated in the transcendental service of the Lord. Mad-bhaktim labhate
param (Bg. 18.54). One cannot remain in the quality of Brahman, the
Absolute, until one's mind is fixed on the lotus feet of the Lord. Sa
vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. To be always engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, or to remain in Krsna
consciousness, is to be factually liberated from the mode of passion
and all material contamination.
TEXT 28
yunjann evam sadatmanam
yogi vigata-kalmasah
sukhena brahma-samsparsam
atyantam sukham asnute
SYNONYMS
yunjan--thus being engaged in yoga practice; evam--thus; sada--always;
atmanam--self; yogi--one who is in touch with the Supreme Self; vigata-
-is freed from; kalmasah--all material contamination; sukhena--in
transcendental happiness; brahma-samsparsam--being in constant touch
with the Supreme; atyantam--highest; sukham--happiness; asnute--
attains.
TRANSLATION
Steady in the self, being freed from all material contamination, the
yogi achieves the highest perfetional stage of happiness in touch with
the supreme consciousness.
PURPORT
Self-realization means knowing one's constitutional position in
relationship to the Supreme. The individual soul is part and parcel of
the Supreme, and his position is to render transcendental service to
the Lord. This transcendental contact with the Supreme is called
brahma-samsparsa.
TEXT 29
sarva-bhuta-stham atmanam
sarva-bhutani catmani
iksate yoga-yuktatma
sarvatra sama-darsanah
SYNONYMS
sarva-bhuta-stham--situated in all beings; atmanam--the Supersoul;
sarva--all; bhutani--entities; ca--also; atmani--in the self; iksate--
does 
see; 
yoga-yukta-atma--one 
who 
is 
dovetailed 
in 
Krsna
consciousness; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-darsanah--seeing equally.
TRANSLATION
A true yogi observes Me in all beings, and also sees every being in Me.
Indeed, the self-realized man sees Me everywhere.
PURPORT
A Krsna conscious yogi is the perfect seer because he sees Krsna, the
Supreme, situated in everyone's heart as Supersoul (Paramatma). Isvarah
sarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati. The Lord in His Paramatma
feature is situated within both the heart of the dog and that of a
brahmana. The perfect yogi knows that the Lord is eternally
transcendental and is not materially affected by His presence in either
a dog or a brahmana. That is the supreme neutrality of the Lord. The
individual soul is also situated in the individual heart, but he is not
present in all hearts. That is the distinction between the individual
soul and the Supersoul. One who is not factually in the practice of
yoga cannot see so clearly. A Krsna conscious person can see Krsna in
the heart of both the believer and the nonbeliever. In the smrti this
is confirmed as follows: atatatvac ca matrtvac ca atma hi paramo harih.
The Lord, being the source of all beings, is like the mother and the
maintainer. As the mother is neutral to all different kinds of
children, the supreme father (or mother) is also. Consequently the
Supersoul is always in every living being.
Outwardly, also, every living being is situated in the energy of the
Lord. As will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, the Lord has,
primarily, two energies--the spiritual (or superior) and the material
(or inferior). The living entity, although part of the superior energy,
is conditioned by the inferior energy; the living entity is always in
the Lord's energy. Every living entity is situated in Him in one way or
another.
The yogi sees equally because he sees that all living entities,
although in different situations according to the results of fruitive
work, in all circumstances remain the servants of God. While in the
material energy, the living entity serves the material senses; and
while in spiritual energy, he serves the Supreme Lord directly. In
either case the living entity is the servant of God. This vision of
equality is perfect in a person in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 30
yo mam pasyati sarvatra
sarvam ca mayi pasyati
tasyaham na pranasyami
sa ca me na pranasyati
SYNONYMS
yah--whoever; mam--Me; pasyati--sees; sarvatra--everywhere; sarvam--
everything; ca--and; mayi--in Me; pasyati--he sees; tasya--his; aham--
I; na--not; pranasyami--am lost; sah--he; ca--also; me--to Me; na--nor;
pranasyati--is lost.
TRANSLATION
For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never
lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness certainly sees Lord Krsna everywhere,
and he sees everything in Krsna. Such a person may appear to see all
separate manifestations of the material nature, but in each and every
instance he is conscious of Krsna, knowing that everything is the
manifestation of Krsna's energy. Nothing can exist without Krsna, and
Krsna is the Lord of everything--this is the basic principle of Krsna
consciousness. Krsna consciousness is the development of love of Krsna-
-a position transcendental even to material liberation. It is the stage
beyond self-realization at which the devotee becomes one with Krsna in
the sense that Krsna becomes everything for the devotee and the devotee
becomes full in loving Krsna. An intimate relationship between the Lord
and the devotee then exists. In that stage, the living entity attains
his immortality. Nor is the Personality of Godhead ever out of the
sight of the devotee. To merge in Krsna is spiritual annihilation. A
devotee takes no such risk. It is stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.38):
premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena
santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti
yam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupam
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, who is always seen by the
devotee whose eyes are anointed with the pulp of love. He is seen in
His eternal form of Syamasundara situated within the heart of the
devotee."
At this stage, Lord Krsna never disappears from the sight of the
devotee, nor does the devotee ever lose sight of the Lord. In the case
of a yogi who sees the Lord as Paramatma within the heart, the same
applies. Such a yogi turns into a pure devotee and cannot bear to live
for a moment without seeing the Lord within himself.
TEXT 31
sarva-bhuta-sthitam yo mam
bhajaty ekatvam asthitah
sarvatha vartamano 'pi
sa yogi mayi vartate
SYNONYMS
sarva-bhuta-sthitam--situated in everyone's heart; yah--he who; mam--
unto Me; bhajati--serves in devotional service; ekatvam--oneness;
asthitah--thus situated; sarvatha--in all respects; varta-manah--being
situated; api--in spite of; sah--he; yogi--transcendentalist; mayi--
unto Me; vartate--remains.
TRANSLATION
The yogi who knows that I and the Supersoul within all creatures are
one worships Me and remains always in Me in all circumstances.
PURPORT
A yogi who is practicing meditation on the Supersoul sees within
himself the plenary portion of Krsna as Visnu--with four hands, holding
conchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower. The yogi should know that
Visnu is not different from Krsna. Krsna in this form of Supersoul is
situated in everyone's heart. Furthermore, there is no difference
between the innumerable Supersouls present in the innumerable hearts of
living entities. Nor is there a difference between a Krsna conscious
person always engaged in the transcendental loving service of Krsna and
a perfect yogi engaged in meditation on the Supersoul. The yogi in
Krsna consciousness--even though he may be engaged in various
activities while in material existence--remains always situated in
Krsna. This is confirmed in the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) of
Srila Rupa Gosvami: nikhilasv apy avasthasu jivan-muktah sa ucyate. A
devotee of the Lord, always acting in Krsna consciousness, is
automatically liberated. In the Narada-pancaratra this is confirmed in
this way:
dik-kalady-anavacchinne
krsne ceto vidhaya ca
tan-mayo bhavati ksipram
jivo brahmani yojayet
"By concentrating one's attention on the transcendental form of Krsna,
who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one becomes absorbed in
thinking of Krsna and then attains the happy state of transcendental
association with Him."
Krsna consciousness is the highest stage of trance in yoga practice.
This very understanding that Krsna is present as Paramatma in
everyone's heart makes the yogi faultless. The Vedas (Gopala-tapani
Upanisad 1.21) confirm this inconceivable potency of the Lord as
follows: eko 'pi san bahudha yo 'vabhati. "Although the Lord is one, He
is present in innumerable hearts as many." Similarly, in the smrti-
sastra it is said:
eka eva paro visnuh
sarva-vyapi na samsayah
aisvaryad rupam ekam ca
surya-vat bahudheyate
"Visnu is one, and yet He is certainly all-pervading. By His
inconceivable potency, in spite of His one form, He is present
everywhere, as the sun appears in many places at once."
TEXT 32
atmaupamyena sarvatra
samam pasyati yo 'rjuna
sukham va yadi va duhkham
sa yogi paramo matah
SYNONYMS
atma--self; aupamyena--by comparison; sarvatra--everywhere; samam--
equally; pasyati--sees; yah--he who; arjuna--O Arjuna; sukham--
happiness; va--or; yadi--if; va--or; duhkham--distress; sah--such;
yogi--transcendentalist; paramah--perfect; matah--considered.
TRANSLATION
He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true
equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O Arjuna!
PURPORT
One who is Krsna conscious is a perfect yogi; he is aware of everyone's
happiness and distress by dint of his own personal experience. The
cause of the distress of a living entity is forgetfulness of his
relationship with God. And the cause of happiness is knowing Krsna to
be the supreme enjoyer of all the activities of the human being. Krsna
is the proprietor of all lands and planets, and the sincerest friend of
all living entities. The perfect yogi knows that the living being who
is conditioned by the modes of material nature is subjected to the
threefold material miseries due to forgetfulness of his relationship
with Krsna. Because one in Krsna consciousness is happy, he tries to
distribute the knowledge of Krsna everywhere. Since the perfect yogi
tries to broadcast the importance of becoming Krsna conscious, he is
the best philanthropist in the world, and he is the dearest servitor of
the Lord. Na ca tasman manusyesu kascin me priya-krttamah (Bg. 18.69).
In other words, a devotee of the Lord always looks to the welfare of
all living entities, and in this way he is factually the friend of
everyone. He is the best yogi because he does not desire perfection in
yoga for his personal benefit, but tries for others also. He does not
envy his fellow living entities. Here is a contrast between a pure
devotee of the Lord and a yogi interested only in his personal
elevation. The yogi who has withdrawn to a secluded place in order to
meditate perfectly may not be as perfect as a devotee who is trying his
best to turn every man toward Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 33
arjuna uvaca
yo 'yam yogas tvaya proktah
samyena madhusudana
etasyaham na pasyami
cancalatvat sthitim sthiram
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; yah--the system; ayam--this; yogah--
mysticism; tvaya--by You; proktah--described; samyena--generally;
madhu-sudana--O killer of the demon Madhu; etasya--of this; aham--I;
na--do not; pasyami--see; cancalatvat--due to being restless; sthitim--
situation; sthiram--stable.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Madhusudana, the system of yoga which You have
summarized appears impractical and unendurable to me, for the mind is
restless and unsteady.
PURPORT
The system of mysticism described by Lord Krsna to Arjuna beginning
with the words sucau dese and ending with yogi paramah is here being
rejected by Arjuna out of a feeling of inability. It is not possible
for an ordinary man to leave home and go to a secluded place in the
mountains or jungles to practice yoga in this Age of Kali. The present
age is characterized by a bitter struggle for a life of short duration.
People are not serious about self-realization even by simple, practical
means, and what to speak of this difficult yoga system, which regulates
the mode of living, the manner of sitting, selection of place, and
detachment of the mind from material engagements. As a practical man,
Arjuna thought it was impossible to follow this system of yoga, even
though he was favorably endowed in many ways. He belonged to the royal
family and was highly elevated in terms of numerous qualities; he was a
great warrior, he had great longevity, and, above all, he was the most
intimate friend of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Five
thousand years ago, Arjuna had much better facilities than we do now,
yet he refused to accept this system of yoga. In fact, we do not find
any record in history of his practicing it at any time. Therefore this
system must be considered generally impossible in this Age of Kali. Of
course it may be possible for some very few, rare men, but for the
people in general it is an impossible proposal. If this were so five
thousand years ago, then what of the present day? Those who are
imitating this yoga system in different so-called schools and
societies, although complacent, are certainly wasting their time. They
are completely in ignorance of the desired goal.
TEXT 34
cancalam hi manah krsna
pramathi balavad drdham
tasyaham nigraham manye
vayor iva su-duskaram
SYNONYMS
cancalam--flickering; hi--certainly; manah--mind; krsna--O Krsna;
pramathi--agitating; bala-vat--strong; drdham--obstinate; tasya--its;
aham--I; nigraham--subduing; manye--think; vayoh--of the wind; iva--
like; su-duskaram--difficult.
TRANSLATION
For the mind is restless, turbulent, obstinate and very strong, O Krsna
and to subdue it, I think, is more difficult than controlling the wind.
PURPORT
The mind is so strong and obstinate that it sometimes overcomes the
intelligence, although mind is supposed to be subservient to the
intelligence. For a man in the practical world who has to fight so many
opposing elements, it is certainly very difficult to control the mind.
Artificially, one may establish a mental equilibrium toward both friend
and enemy, but ultimately no worldly man can do so, for this is more
difficult than controlling the raging wind. In the Vedic literature
(Katha Upanisad 1.3.3-4) it is said:
atmanam rathinam viddhi
sariram ratham eva ca
buddhim tu sarathim viddhi
manah pragraham eva ca
indriyani hayan ahur
visayams tesu gocaran
atmendriya-mano-yuktam
bhoktety ahur manisinah
"The individual is the passenger in the car of the material body, and
intelligence is the driver. Mind is the driving instrument, and the
senses are the horses. The self is thus the enjoyer or sufferer in the
association of the mind and senses. So it is understood by great
thinkers." Intelligence is supposed to direct the mind, but the mind is
so strong and obstinate that it often overcomes even one's own
intelligence. Such a strong mind is supposed to be controlled by the
practice of yoga, but such practice is never practical for a worldly
person like Arjuna. And what can we say of modern man? The simile used
here is appropriate: one cannot capture the blowing wind. And it is
even more difficult to capture the turbulent mind. The easiest way to
control the mind, as suggested by Lord Caitanya, is chanting "Hare
Krsna," the great mantra for deliverance, in all humility. The method
prescribed is sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh: one must engage one's
mind fully in Krsna. Only then will there remain no other engagements
to agitate the mind.
TEXT 35
sri-bhagavan uvaca
asamsayam maha-baho
mano durnigraham calam
abhyasena tu kaunteya
vairagyena ca grhyate
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; asamsayam--
undoubtedly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; manah--mind; durnigraham--
difficult to curb; calam--flickering; abhyasena--by practice; tu--but;
kaunteya--O son of Kunti; vairagyena--by detachment; ca--also; grhyate-
-can be so controlled.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly
very difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by
constant practice and by detachment.
PURPORT
The difficulty of controlling the obstinate mind, as expressed by
Arjuna, is accepted by the Personality of Godhead. But at the same time
He suggests that by practice and detachment it is possible. What is
that practice? In the present age no one can observe the strict rules
and regulations of placing oneself in a sacred place, focusing the mind
on the Supersoul, restraining the senses and mind, observing celibacy,
remaining alone, etc. By the practice of Krsna consciousness, however,
one engages in nine types of devotional service to the Lord. The first
and foremost of such devotional engagements is hearing about Krsna.
This is a very powerful transcendental method for purging the mind of
all misgivings. The more one hears about Krsna, the more one becomes
enlightened and detached from everything that draws the mind away from
Krsna. By detaching the mind from activities not devoted to the Lord,
one can very easily learn vairagya. Vairagya means detachment from
matter and engagement of the mind in spirit. Impersonal spiritual
detachment is more difficult than attaching the mind to the activities
of Krsna. This is practical because by hearing about Krsna one becomes
automatically attached to the Supreme Spirit. This attachment is called
paresanubhava, spiritual satisfaction. It is just like the feeling of
satisfaction a hungry man has for every morsel of food he eats.
Similarly, by discharge of devotional service one feels transcendental
satisfaction as the mind becomes detached from material objectives. It
is something like curing a disease by expert treatment and appropriate
diet. Hearing of the transcendental activities of Lord Krsna is
therefore expert treatment for the mad mind, and eating the foodstuff
offered to Krsna is the appropriate diet for the suffering patient.
This treatment is the process of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 36
asamyatatmana yogo
dusprapa iti me matih
vasyatmana tu yatata
sakyo 'vaptum upayatah
SYNONYMS
asamyata--unbridled; atmana--by the mind; yogah--self-realization;
dusprapah--difficult to obtain; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion;
vasya--controlled; atmana--by the mind; tu--but; yatata--while
endeavoring; sakyah--practical; avaptum--to achieve; upayatah--
appropriate means.
TRANSLATION
For one whose mind is unbridled, self-realization is difficult work.
But he whose mind is controlled and who strives by right means is
assured of success. That is My opinion.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead declares that one who does not
accept the proper treatment to detach the mind from material engagement
can hardly achieve success in self-realization. Trying to practice yoga
while engaging the mind in material enjoyment is like trying to ignite
a fire while pouring water on it. Similarly, yoga practice without
mental control is a waste of time. Such a show of yoga practice may be
materially lucrative, but it is useless as far as spiritual realization
is concerned. Therefore, the mind must be controlled by engaging it
constantly in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Unless one
is engaged in Krsna consciousness, he cannot steadily control the mind.
A Krsna conscious person easily achieves the result of yoga practice
without separate endeavor, but a yoga practitioner cannot achieve
success without becoming Krsna conscious.
TEXT 37
arjuna uvaca
ayatih sraddhayopeto
yogac calita-manasah
aprapya yoga-samsiddhim
kam gatim krsna gacchati
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; ayatih--unsuccessful transcendentalist;
sraddhaya--with faith; upetah--engaged; yogat--from the mystic link;
calita--deviated; manasah--of one who has such a mind; aprapya--
failing; yoga-samsiddhim--highest perfection in mysticism; kam--which;
gatim--destination; krsna--O Krsna; gacchati--achieves.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: What is the destination of the man of faith who does not
persevere, who in the beginning takes to the process of self-
realization but who later desists due to worldly-mindedness and thus
does not attain perfection in mysticism?
PURPORT
The path of self-realization or mysticism is described in the Bhagavad-
gita. The basic principle of self-realization is knowledge that the
living entity is not this material body but that he is different from
it and that his happiness is in eternal life, bliss and knowledge.
These are transcendental, beyond both body and mind. Self-realization
is sought by the path of knowledge, the practice of the eightfold
system or by bhakti-yoga. In each of these processes one has to realize
the constitutional position of the living entity, his relationship with
God, and the activities whereby he can reestablish the lost link and
achieve the highest perfectional stage of Krsna consciousness.
Following any of the above-mentioned three methods, one is sure to
reach the supreme goal sooner or later. This was asserted by the Lord
in the Second Chapter: even a little endeavor on the transcendental
path offers a great hope for deliverance. Out of these three methods,
the path of bhakti-yoga is especially suitable for this age because it
is the most direct method of God realization. To be doubly assured,
Arjuna is asking Lord Krsna to confirm His former statement. One may
sincerely accept the path of self-realization, but the process of
cultivation of knowledge and the practice of the eightfold yoga system
are generally very difficult for this age. Therefore, despite constant
endeavor one may fail for many reasons. First of all, one may not be
following the process. To pursue the transcendental path is more or
less to declare war on the illusory energy. Consequently, whenever a
person tries to escape the clutches of the illusory energy, she tries
to defeat the practitioner by various allurements. A conditioned soul
is already allured by the modes of material energy, and there is every
chance of being allured again, even while performing transcendental
disciplines. This is called yogac calita-manasah: deviation from the
transcendental path. Arjuna is inquisitive to know the results of
deviation from the path of self-realization.
TEXT 38
kaccin nobhaya-vibhrastas
chinnabhram iva nasyati
apratistho maha-baho
vimudho brahmanah pathi
SYNONYMS
kaccit--whether; na--not; ubhaya--both; vibhrastah--deviated from;
chinna--fallen; 
abhram--cloud; 
iva--like; 
nasyati--perishes;
apratisthah--without any position; maha-baho--O mighty-armed Krsna;
vimudhah--bewildered; brahmanah--of transcendence; pathi--on the path.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed Krsna, does not such a man, being deviated from the path
of transcendence, perish like a riven cloud, with no position in any
sphere?
PURPORT
There are two ways to progress. Those who are materialists have no
interest in transcendence; therefore they are more interested in
material advancement by economic development, or in promotion to the
higher planets by appropriate work. When one takes to the path of
transcendence, one has to cease all material activities and sacrifice
all forms of so-called material happiness. If the aspiring
transcendentalist fails, then he apparently loses both ways; in other
words, he can enjoy neither material happiness nor spiritual success.
He has no position; he is like a riven cloud. A cloud in the sky
sometimes deviates from a small cloud and joins a big one. But if it
cannot join a big one, then it is blown away by the wind and becomes a
nonentity in the vast sky. The brahmanah pathi is the path of
transcendental realization through knowing oneself to be spiritual in
essence, part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, who is manifested as
Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Lord Sri Krsna is the fullest
manifestation of the Supreme Absolute Truth, and therefore one who is
surrendered to the Supreme Person is a successful transcendentalist. To
reach this goal of life through Brahman and Paramatma realization takes
many, many births (bahunam janmanam ante). Therefore the supermost path
of transcendental realization is bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,
the direct method.
TEXT 39
etan me samsayam krsna
chettum arhasy asesatah
tvad-anyah samsayasyasya
chetta na hy upapadyate
SYNONYMS
etat--this is; me--my; samsayam--doubt; krsna--O Krsna; chettum--to
dispel; arhasi--requested to do; asesatah--completely; tvat--than You;
anyah--without; samsayasya--of the doubt; asya--of this; chetta--
remover; na--never; hi--certainly; upapadyate--to be found.
TRANSLATION
This is my doubt, O Krsna, and I ask You to dispel it completely. But
for Yourself, no one is to be found who can destroy this doubt.
PURPORT
Krsna is the perfect knower of past, present and future. In the
beginning of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord said that all living entities
existed individually in the past, they exist now in the present, and
they continue to retain individual identity in the future, even after
liberation from the material entanglement. So He has already cleared up
the question of the future of the individual living entity. Now, Arjuna
wants to know of the future of the unsuccessful transcendentalist. No
one is equal to or above Krsna, and certainly the so-called great sages
and philosophers who are at the mercy of material nature cannot equal
Him. Therefore the verdict of Krsna is the final and complete answer to
all doubts, because He knows past, present and future perfectly--but no
one knows Him. Krsna and Krsna conscious devotees alone can know what
is what.
TEXT 40
sri-bhagavan uvaca
partha naiveha namutra
vinasas tasya vidyate
na hi kalyana-krt kascid
durgatim tata gacchati
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; partha--O
son of Prtha; na eva--never is it so; iha--in this material world; na--
never; amutra--in the next life; vinasah--destruction; tasya--his;
vidyate--exists; na--never; hi--certainly; kalyana-krt--one who is
engaged in auspicious activities; 
kascit--anyone; 
durgatim--
degradation; tata--thereafter; gacchati--goes.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist engaged in
auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in this
world or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is never
overcome by evil.
PURPORT
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) Sri Narada Muni instructs Vyasadeva
as follows:
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kim
ko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone gives up all material prospects and takes complete shelter
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no loss or degradation
in any way. On the other hand a nondevotee may fully engage in his
occupational duties and yet not gain anything." For material prospects,
there are many activities both scriptural and customary. A
transcendentalist is supposed to give up all material activities for
the sake of spiritual advancement in life, Krsna consciousness. One may
argue that by Krsna consciousness one may attain the highest perfection
if it is completed, but if one does not attain such a perfectional
stage, then he loses both materially and spiritually. It is enjoined in
the scriptures that one has to suffer the reaction of not executing
prescribed duties; therefore one who fails to discharge transcendental
activities properly becomes subjected to these reactions. The
Bhagavatam assures the unsuccessful transcendentalist that there need
be no worries. Even though he may be subjected to the reaction of not
perfectly executing prescribed duties, he is still not a loser, because
auspicious Krsna consciousness is never forgotten, and one so engaged
will continue to be so even if he is lowborn in the next life. On the
other hand, one who simply follows strictly the prescribed duties need
not necessarily attain auspicious results if he is lacking in Krsna
consciousness.
The purport may be understood as follows: humanity may be divided into
two sections, namely, the regulated and the nonregulated. Those who are
engaged simply in bestial sense gratifications without knowledge of
their next life or spiritual salvation belong to the nonregulated
section. And those who follow the principles of prescribed duties in
the scriptures are classified amongst the regulated section. The
nonregulated section, both civilized and noncivilized, educated and
noneducated, strong and weak, are full of animal propensities. Their
activities are never auspicious, because while enjoying the animal
propensities of eating, sleeping, defending and mating, they
perpetually remain in material existence, which is always miserable. On
the other hand, those who are regulated by scriptural injunctions and
thus gradually rise to Krsna consciousness certainly progress in life.
Those who are then following the path of auspiciousness can be divided
into three sections, namely 1) the followers of scriptural rules and
regulations who are enjoying material prosperity, 2) those who are
trying to find out ultimate liberation from material existence, and 3)
those who are devotees in Krsna consciousness. Those who are following
the rules and regulations of the scriptures for material happiness may
be further divided into two classes: those who are fruitive workers and
those who desire no fruit for sense gratification. Those who are after
fruitive results for sense gratification may be elevated to a higher
standard of life--even to the higher planets; but still, because they
are not free from material existence, they are not following the truly
auspicious path. The only auspicious activities are those which lead
one to liberation. Any activity which is not aimed at ultimate self-
realization or liberation from the material bodily concept of life is
not at all auspicious. Activity in Krsna consciousness is the only
auspicious activity, and anyone who voluntarily accepts all bodily
discomforts for the sake of making progress on the path of Krsna
consciousness can be called a perfect transcendentalist under severe
austerity. And because the eightfold yoga system is directed toward the
ultimate realization of Krsna consciousness, such practice is also
auspicious, and no one who is trying his best in this matter need fear
degradation.
TEXT 41
prapya punya-krtam lokan
usitva sasvatih samah
sucinam srimatam gehe
yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate
SYNONYMS
prapya--after achieving; punya-krtam--of those who performed pious
activities; lokan--planets; usitva--after dwelling; sasvatih--many;
samah--years; sucinam--of the pious; sri-matam--of the prosperous;
gehe--in the house of; yoga-bhrastah--one who is fallen from the path
of self-realization; abhijayate--takes his birth.
TRANSLATION
The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the
planets of the pious living entities, is born into a family of
righteous people, or into a family of rich aristocracy.
PURPORT
The unsuccessful yogis are divided into two classes: one is fallen
after very little progress, and one is fallen after long practice of
yoga. The yogi who falls after a short period of practice goes to the
higher planets where pious living entities are allowed to enter. After
prolonged life there, he is sent back again to this planet, to take
birth in the family of a righteous brahmana vaisnava or of aristocratic
merchants.
The real purpose of yoga practice is to achieve the highest perfection
of Krsna consciousness. But those who do not persevere to such an
extent and fail due to material allurements are allowed, by the grace
of the Lord, to make full utilization of their material propensities.
And after that, they are given opportunities to live prosperous lives
in righteous or aristocratic families. Those who are born in such
families may take advantage of the facilities and try to elevate
themselves to full Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 42
atha va yoginam eva
kule bhavati dhimatam
etad dhi durlabhataram
loke janma yad idrsam
SYNONYMS
atha va--or; yoginam--of learned transcendentalists; eva--certainly;
kule--in the family of; bhavati--takes birth; dhi-matam--of those who
are endowed with great wisdom; etat--this; hi--certainly; durlabha-
taram--very rare; loke--in this world; janma--birth; yat--that which;
idrsam--like this.
TRANSLATION
Or he takes his birth in a family of transcendentalists who are surely
great in wisdom. Verily, such a birth is rare in this world.
PURPORT
Birth in a family of yogis or transcendentalists--those with great
wisdom--is praised herein because the child born in such a family
receives a spiritual impetus from the very beginning of his life. It is
especially the case in the acarya or gosvami families. Such families
are very learned and devoted by tradition and training, and thus they
become spiritual masters. In India there are many such acarya families,
but they have now degenerated due to insufficient education and
training. By the grace of the Lord, there are still families that
foster transcendentalists generation after generation. It is certainly
very fortunate to take birth in such families. Fortunately, both our
spiritual master, Om Visnupada Sri Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Gosvami Maharaja, and our humble self, had the opportunity to take
birth in such families, by the grace of the Lord, and both of us were
trained in the devotional service of the Lord from the very beginning
of our lives. Later on we met by the order of the transcendental
system.
TEXT 43
tatra tam buddhi-samyogam
labhate paurva-dehikam
yatate ca tato bhuyah
samsiddhau kuru-nandana
SYNONYMS
tatra--thereupon; 
tam--that; 
buddhi-samyogam--revival 
of 
such
consciousness; labhate--regains; paurva--previous; dehikam--bodily
consciousness; yatate--he endeavors; ca--also; tatah--thereafter;
bhuyah--again; samsiddhau--for perfection; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATION
On taking such a birth, he again revives the divine consciousness of
his previous life, and he tries to make further progress in order to
achieve complete success, O son of Kuru.
PURPORT
King Bharata, who took his third birth in the family of a good
brahmana, is an example of good birth for the revival of previous
transcendental consciousness. King Bharata was the emperor of the
world, and since his time this planet is known among the demigods as
Bharata-varsa. Formerly it was known as Ilavrta-varsa. The emperor, at
an early age, retired for spiritual perfection but failed to achieve
success. In his next life he took birth in the family of a good
brahmana and was known as Jada Bharata because he always remained
secluded and did not talk to anyone. And later on, he was discovered as
the greatest transcendentalist by King Rahugana. From his life it is
understood that transcendental endeavors, or the practice of yoga,
never go in vain. By the grace of the Lord the transcendentalist gets
repeated opportunities for complete perfection in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 44
purvabhyasena tenaiva
hriyate hy avaso 'pi sah
jijnasur api yogasya
sabda-brahmativartate
SYNONYMS
purva--previous; abhyasena--practice; tena--by the influence of that;
eva--certainly; hriyate--is attracted; hi--surely; avasah--helpless;
api--also; sah--he; jijnasuh--willing to know; api--so; yogasya--of
yoga; sabda-brahma--ritualistic principles of scripture; ativartate--
transcends.
TRANSLATION
By virtue of the divine consciousness of his previous life, he
automatically becomes attracted to the yogic principles--even without
seeking them. Such an inquisitive transcendentalist, striving for yoga,
stands always above the ritualistic principles of the scriptures.
PURPORT
Advanced yogis are not very much attracted to the rituals of the
scriptures, but they automatically become attracted to the yoga
principles, which can elevate them to complete Krsna consciousness, the
highest yoga perfection. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7), such
disregard of Vedic rituals by the advanced transcendentalists is
explained as follows:
aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmanucur nama grnanti ye te
"O my Lord! Persons who chant the holy names of Your Lordship are far,
far advanced in spiritual life, even if born in families of dog-eaters.
Such chanters have undoubtedly performed all kinds of austerities and
sacrifices, bathed in all sacred places, and finished all scriptural
studies."
The famous example of this was presented by Lord Caitanya, who accepted
Thakura Haridasa as one of His most important disciples. Although
Thakura Haridasa happened to take his birth in a Muslim family, he was
elevated to the post of namacarya by Lord Caitanya due to his rigidly
attended principle of chanting three hundred thousand holy names of the
Lord daily: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. And because he chanted the holy name
of the Lord constantly, it is understood that in his previous life he
must have passed through all the ritualistic methods of the Vedas,
known as sabda-brahma. Unless, therefore, one is purified, one cannot
take to the principle of Krsna consciousness or become engaged in
chanting the holy name of the Lord, Hare Krsna.
TEXT 45
prayatnad yatamanas tu
yogi samsuddha-kilbisah
aneka-janma-samsiddhas
tato yati param gatim
SYNONYMS
prayatnat--by rigid practice; yatamanah--one who endeavors; tu--but;
yogi--such a transcendentalist; samsuddha--washed off; kilbisah--all
kinds of sins; aneka--many, many; janma--births; samsiddhah--so
achieved perfection; tatah--thereafter; yati--attains; param--highest;
gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
But when the yogi engages himself with sincere endeavor in making
further progress, being washed of all contaminations, then ultimately,
after many, many births of practice, he attains the supreme goal.
PURPORT
A person born in a particularly righteous, aristocratic or sacred
family becomes conscious of his favorable condition for executing yoga
practice. With determination, therefore, he begins the unfinished task,
and thus he completely cleanses himself of all material contaminations.
When he is finally free from all contaminations, he attains the supreme
perfection--Krsna consciousness. Krsna consciousness is the perfect
stage of being freed of all contaminations. This is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita (7.28):
yesam tv anta-gatam papam
jananam punya-karmanam
te dvandva-moha-nirmukta
bhajante mam drdha-vratah
"After many, many births of executing pious activities, when one is
completely freed from all contaminations, and from all illusory
dualities, one then becomes engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord."
TEXT 46
tapasvibhyo 'dhiko yogi
jnanibhyo 'pi mato 'dhikah
karmibhyas cadhiko yogi
tasmad yogi bhavarjuna
SYNONYMS
tapasvibhyah--than the ascetic; adhikah--greater; yogi--the yogi;
jnanibhyah--than the wise; api--also; matah--considered; adhikah--
greater than; karmibhyah--than the fruitive worker; ca--also; adhikah--
greater 
than; 
yogi--the 
yogi; 
tasmat--therefore; 
yogi--a
transcendentalist; bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
A yogi is greater than the ascetic, greater than the empiricist and
greater than the fruitive worker. Therefore, O Arjuna, in all
circumstances, be a yogi.
PURPORT
When we speak of yoga we refer to linking up our consciousness with the
Supreme Absolute Truth. Such a process is named differently by various
practitioners in terms of the particular method adopted. When the
linking up process is predominantly in fruitive activities it is called
karma-yoga, when it is predominantly empirical it is called jnana-yoga,
and when it is predominantly in a devotional relationship with the
Supreme Lord it is called bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga or Krsna
consciousness is the ultimate perfection of all yogas, as will be
explained in the next verse. The Lord has confirmed herein the
superiority of yoga, but He has not mentioned that it is better than
bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga is full spiritual knowledge, and as such
nothing can excel it. Asceticism without self-knowledge is imperfect.
Empiric knowledge without surrender to the Supreme Lord is also
imperfect. And fruitive work without Krsna consciousness is a waste of
time. Therefore, the most highly praised form of yoga performance
mentioned here is bhakti-yoga, and this is still more clearly explained
in the next verse.
TEXT 47
yoginam api sarvesam
mad-gatenantar-atmana
sraddhavan bhajate yo mam
sa me yuktatamo matah
SYNONYMS
yoginam--of all yogis; api--also; sarvesam--all types of; mat-gatena--
abiding in Me; antah-atmana--always thinking of Me within; sraddha-van-
-in full faith; bhajate--renders transcendental loving service; yah--
one who; mam--Me (the Supreme Lord); sah--he; me--Mine; yukta-tamah--
the greatest yogi; matah--is considered.
TRANSLATION
And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith,
worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately
united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.
PURPORT
The word bhajate is significant here. Bhajate has its root in the verb
bhaj, which is used when there is need of service. The English word
"worship" cannot be used in the same sense as bhaj. Worship means to
adore, or to show respect and honor to the worthy one. But service with
love and faith is especially meant for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One can avoid worshiping a respectable man or a demigod and
may be called discourteous, but one cannot avoid serving the Supreme
Lord without being thoroughly condemned. Every living entity is part
and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus every living
entity is intended to serve the Supreme Lord by his own constitution.
Failing to do this, he falls down. The Bhagavatam (11.5.3) confirms
this as follows:
ya esam purusam saksad
atma-prabhavam isvaram
na bhajanty avajananti
sthanad bhrastah patanty adhah
"Anyone who does not render service and neglects his duty unto the
primeval Lord, who is the source of all living entities, will certainly
fall down from his constitutional position."
In this verse also the word bhajanti is used. Therefore, bhajanti is
applicable to the Supreme Lord only, whereas the word "worship" can be
applied to demigods or to any other common living entity. The word
avajananti, used in this verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam, is also found in
the Bhagavad-gita. Avajananti mam mudhah: "Only the fools and rascals
deride the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord Krsna." Such fools take
it upon themselves to write commentaries on the Bhagavad-gita without
an attitude of service to the Lord. Consequently they cannot properly
distinguish between the word bhajanti and the word "worship."
The culmination of all kinds of yoga practices lies in bhakti yoga. All
other yogas are but means to come to the point of bhakti in bhakti-
yoga. Yoga actually means bhakti-yoga; all other yogas are progressions
toward the destination of bhakti-yoga. From the beginning of karma-yoga
to the end of bhakti-yoga is a long way to self-realization. Karma-
yoga, without fruitive results, is the beginning of this path. When
karma-yoga increases in knowledge and renunciation, the stage is called
jnana-yoga. When jnana-yoga increases in meditation on the Supersoul by
different physical processes, and the mind is on Him, it is called
astanga-yoga. And, when one surpasses the astanga-yoga he comes to the
point of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna, it is called bhakti
yoga, the culmination. Factually, bhakti-yoga is the ultimate goal, but
to analyze bhakti-yoga minutely one has to understand these other
yogas. The yogi who is progressive is therefore on the true path of
eternal good fortune. One who sticks to a particular point and does not
make further progress is called by that particular name: karma-yogi,
jnana-yogi or dhyana-yogi, raja-yogi, hatha-yogi, etc. If one is
fortunate enough to come to the point of bhakti-yoga, it is to be
understood that he has surpassed all other yogas. Therefore, to become
Krsna conscious is the highest stage of yoga, just as, when we speak of
Himalayan, we refer to the world's highest mountains, of which the
highest peak, Mount Everest, is considered to be the culmination.
It is by great fortune that one comes to Krsna consciousness on the
path of bhakti-yoga to become well situated according to the Vedic
direction. The ideal yogi concentrates his attention on Krsna, who is
called Syamasundara, who is as beautifully colored as a cloud, whose
lotus-like face is as effulgent as the sun, whose dress is brilliant
with jewels and whose body is flower-garlanded. Illuminating all sides
is His gorgeous luster, which is called the brahmajyoti. He incarnates
in different forms such as Rama, Nrsimha, Varaha and Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and He descends like a human being, as the son
of mother Yasoda, and He is known as Krsna, Govinda and Vasudeva. He is
the perfect child, husband, friend and master, and He is full with all
opulences and transcendental qualities. If one remains fully conscious
of these features of the Lord, he is called the highest yogi.
This stage of highest perfection in yoga can be attained only by
bhakti-yoga, as is confirmed in all Vedic literature:
yasya deve para bhaktir
yatha deve tatha gurau
tasyaite kathita hy arthah
prakasante mahatmanah
"Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in both the Lord
and the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedic knowledge
automatically revealed." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.23)
Bhaktir asya bhajanam tad ihamutropadhi-nairasyenamusmin manah-
kalpanam, etad eva naiskarmyam. "Bhakti means devotional service to the
Lord which is free from desire for material profit, either in this life
or in the next. Devoid of such inclinations, one should fully absorb
the mind in the Supreme. That is the purpose of naiskarmya." (Gopala-
tapani Upanisad 1.15)
These are some of the means for performance of bhakti, or Krsna
consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of the yoga system.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Sixth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Sankhya-yoga Brahma-vidya.