Chapter 9
The Most Confidential Knowledge
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam tu te guhyatamam
pravaksyamy anasuyave
jnanam vijnana-sahitam
yaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam--
this; tu--but; te--unto you; guhya-tamam--the most confidential;
pravaksyami--I am speaking; anasuyave--to the nonenvious; jnanam--
knowledge; vijnana--realized knowledge; sahitam--with; yat--which;
jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be released; asubhat--from this miserable
material existence.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said: My dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of
Me, I shall impart to you this most secret wisdom, knowing which you
shall be relieved of the miseries of material existence.
PURPORT
As a devotee hears more and more about the Supreme Lord, he becomes
enlightened. This hearing process is recommended in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam: "The messages of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are
full of potencies, and these potencies can be realized if topics
regarding the Supreme Godhead are discussed amongst devotees. This
cannot be achieved by the association of mental speculators or academic
scholars, for it is realized knowledge."
The devotees are constantly engaged in the Supreme Lord's service. The
Lord understands the mentality and sincerity of a particular living
entity who is engaged in Krsna consciousness and gives him the
intelligence to understand the science of Krsna in the association of
the devotees. Discussion of Krsna is very potent, and if a fortunate
person has such association and tries to assimilate the knowledge, then
he will surely make advancement toward spiritual realization. Lord
Krsna, in order to encourage Arjuna to higher and higher elevation in
His potent service, describes in this Ninth Chapter matters more
confidential than any He has already disclosed.
The very beginning of Bhagavad-gita, the First Chapter, is more or less
an introduction to the rest of the book; and in the Second and Third
chapters, the spiritual knowledge described is called confidential.
Topics discussed in the Seventh and Eighth chapters are specifically
related to devotional service, and because they bring enlightenment in
Krsna consciousness, they are called more confidential. But the matters
which are described in the Ninth Chapter deal with unalloyed, pure
devotion. Therefore this is called the most confidential. One who is
situated in the most confidential knowledge of Krsna is naturally
transcendental; he therefore has no material pangs, although he is in
the material world. In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu it is said that
although one who has a sincere desire to render loving service to the
Supreme Lord is situated in the conditional state of material
existence, he is to be considered liberated. Similarly, we shall find
in the Bhagavad-gita, Tenth Chapter, that anyone who is engaged in that
way is a liberated person.
Now this first verse has specific significance. Knowledge (idam jnanam)
refers to pure devotional service, which consists of nine different
activities: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving, worshiping,
praying, obeying, maintaining friendship and surrendering everything.
By the practice of these nine elements of devotional service one is
elevated to spiritual consciousness, Krsna consciousness. At the time
when one's heart is cleared of the material contamination, one can
understand this science of Krsna. Simply to understand that a living
entity is not material is not sufficient. That may be the beginning of
spiritual realization but one should recognize the difference between
activities of the body and spiritual activities by which one
understands that he is not the body.
In the Seventh Chapter we have already discussed the opulent potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His different energies, the
inferior and superior natures, and all this material manifestation. Now
in Chapters Nine and Ten the glories of the Lord will be delineated.
The Sanskrit word anasuyave in this verse is also very significant.
Generally the commentators, even if they are highly scholarly, are all
envious of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even the most
erudite scholars write on Bhagavad-gita very inaccurately. Because they
are envious of Krsna, their commentaries are useless. The commentaries
given by devotees of the Lord are bona fide. No one can explain
Bhagavad-gita, or give perfect knowledge of Krsna if he is envious. One
who criticizes the character of Krsna without knowing Him is a fool. So
such commentaries should be very carefully avoided. For one who
understands that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the pure
and transcendental Personality, these chapters will be very beneficial.
TEXT 2
raja-vidya raja-guhyam
pavitram idam uttamam
pratyaksavagamam dharmyam
su-sukham kartum avyayam
SYNONYMS
raja-vidya--the king of education; raja-guhyam--the king of
confidential knowledge; pavitram--the purest; idam--this; uttamam--
transcendental; pratyaksa--directly experienced; avagamam--understood;
dharmyam--the principle of religion; su-sukham--very happy; kartum--to
execute; avyayam--everlasting.
TRANSLATION
This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all
secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct
perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of
religion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.
PURPORT
This chapter of Bhagavad-gita is called the king of education because
it is the essence of all doctrines and philosophies explained before.
There are seven principal philosophers in India, Gautama, Kanada,
Kapila, Yajnavalkya, Sandilya, Vaisvanara, and, finally, Vyasadeva, the
author of the Vedanta-sutra. So there is no dearth of knowledge in the
field of philosophy or transcendental knowledge. Now the Lord says that
this Ninth Chapter is the king of all such knowledge, the essence of
all knowledge that can be derived from the study of the Vedas and
different kinds of philosophy. It is the most confidential because
confidential or transcendental knowledge involves understanding the
difference between the soul and the body. And the king of all
confidential knowledge culminates in devotional service.
Generally, people are not educated in this confidential knowledge; they
are educated in external knowledge. As far as ordinary education is
concerned, people are involved with so many departments: politics,
sociology, physics, chemistry, mathematics, astronomy, engineering,
etc. There are so many departments of knowledge all over the world and
many huge universities, but there is, unfortunately, no university or
educational institution where the science of the spirit soul is
instructed. Yet the soul is the most important part of this body;
without the presence of the soul, the body has no value. Still people
are placing great stress on the bodily necessities of life, not caring
for the vital soul.
The Bhagavad-gita, especially from the Second Chapter on, stresses the
importance of the soul. In the very beginning, the Lord says that this
body is perishable and that the soul is not perishable. That is a
confidential part of knowledge: simply knowing that the spirit soul is
different from this body and that its nature is immutable,
indestructible and eternal. But that gives no positive information
about the soul. Sometimes people are under the impression that the soul
is different from the body and that when the body is finished, or one
is liberated from the body, the soul remains in a void and becomes
impersonal. But actually that is not the fact. How can the soul, which
is so active within this body, be inactive after being liberated from
the body? It is always active. If it is eternal, then it is eternally
active, and its activities in the spiritual kingdom are the most
confidential part of spiritual knowledge. These activities of the
spirit soul are therefore indicated here as constituting the king of
all knowledge, the most confidential part of all knowledge.
This knowledge is the purest form of all activities, as is explained in
Vedic literature. In the Padma Purana, man's sinful activities have
been analyzed and are shown to be the results of sin after sin. Those
who are engaged in fruitive activities are entangled in different
stages and forms of sinful reactions. For instance, when the seed of a
particular tree is sown, the tree does not appear immediately to grow;
it takes some time. It is first a small, sprouting plant, then it
assumes the form of a tree, then it flowers, bears fruit, and, when it
is complete, the flowers and fruits are enjoyed by persons who have
sown the seed of the tree. Similarly, a man performs a sinful act, and
like a seed it takes time to fructify. There are different stages. The
sinful action may have already stopped within the individual, but the
results or the fruit of that sinful action are still enjoyed. There are
sins which are still in the form of a seed, and there are others which
are already fructified and are giving us fruit, which we are enjoying
as distress and pain
As explained in the twenty-eighth verse of the Seventh Chapter, a
person who has completely ended the reactions of all sinful activities
and who is fully engaged in pious activities, being freed from the
duality of this material world, becomes engaged in devotional service
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, those who
are actually engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord are
already freed from all reactions. For those who are engaged in the
devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all sinful
reactions, whether fructified, in the stock, or in the form of a seed,
gradually vanish. Therefore the purifying potency of devotional service
is very strong, and it is called pavitram uttamam, the purest. Uttama
means transcendental. Tamas means this material world or darkness, and
uttama means that which is transcendental to material activities.
Devotional activities are never to be considered material, although
sometimes it appears that devotees are engaged just like ordinary men.
One who can see and is familiar with devotional service, however,  will
know that they are not material activities. They are all spiritual and
devotional, uncontaminated by the material modes of nature.
It is said that the execution of devotional service is so perfect that
one can perceive the results directly. This direct result is actually
perceived, and we have practical experience that any person who is
chanting the holy names of Krsna (Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare) in course of
time feels some transcendental pleasure and very quickly becomes
purified of all material contamination. This is actually seen.
Furthermore, if one engages not only in hearing but in trying to
broadcast the message of devotional activities as well, or if he
engages himself in helping the missionary activities of Krsna
consciousness, he gradually feels spiritual progress. This advancement
in spiritual life does not depend on any kind of previous education or
qualification. The method itself is so pure that by simply engaging in
it one becomes pure.
In the Vedanta-sutra (3.2.26) this is also described in the following
words: prakasas ca karmany abhyasat. "Devotional service is so potent
that simply by engaging in the activities of devotional service one
becomes enlightened without a doubt."  Narada, who happened to be the
son of a maidservant, had no education, nor was he born into a high
family. But when his mother was engaged in serving great devotees,
Narada also became engaged, and sometimes, in the absence of his
mother, he would serve the great devotees himself. Narada personally
says, "Once only, by their permission, I took the remnants of their
food, and by so doing all my sins were at once eradicated. Thus being
engaged, I became purified in heart, and at that time the very nature
of the transcendentalist became attractive to me."(Bhag 1.5.25) Narada
tells his disciple Vyasadeva that in a previous life he was engaged as
a boy servant of purified devotees during the four months of their stay
and that he was intimately associating with them. Sometimes those sages
left remnants of food on their dishes, and the boy, who would wash
their dishes, wanted to taste the remnants. So he asked the great
devotees whether he could eat them, and they gave their permission.
Narada then ate those remnants and consequently became freed from all
sinful reactions. As he went on eating, he gradually became as pure-
hearted as the sages, and he gradually developed the same taste. The
great devotees relished the taste of unceasing devotional service of
the Lord, hearing, chanting, etc., and by developing the same taste,
Narada wanted also to hear and chant the glories of the Lord. Thus by
associating with the sages, he developed a great desire for devotional
service. Therefore, he quotes from the Vedanta-sutra (prakasas ca
karmany abhyasat): if one is engaged simply in the acts of devotional
service, everything is revealed to him automatically, and he can
understand. This is called pratyaksa, directly perceived.
Narada was actually a son of a maidservant. He had no opportunity to go
to school. He was simply assisting his mother, and fortunately his
mother rendered some service to the devotees. The child Narada also got
the opportunity and simply by association achieved the highest goal of
all religions, devotional service. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said
that religious people generally do not know that the highest perfection
of religion is the attainment of the stage of devotional service.
Generally Vedic knowledge is required for understanding the path of
self-realization. But here, although he was not educated in the Vedic
principles, Narada acquired the highest results of Vedic study. This
process is so potent that even without performing the religious process
regularly, one can be raised to the highest perfection. How is this
possible? This is also confirmed in Vedic literature: acaryavan puruso
veda. One who is in association with great acaryas, even if he is not
educated or has not studied the Vedas, can become familiar with all the
knowledge necessary for realization.
The process of devotional service is a very happy one. Why? Devotional
service consists of sravanam kirtanam visnoh, so one can simply hear
the chanting of the glories of the Lord or can attend philosophical
lectures on transcendental knowledge given by authorized acaryas.
Simply by sitting, one can learn; then one can eat the remnants of the
food offered to God, nice palatable dishes. In every state devotional
service is joyful. One can execute devotional service even in the most
poverty-stricken condition. The Lord says, patram puspam phalam: He is
ready to accept from the devotee any kind of offering, never mind what.
Even a leaf, a flower, a bit of fruit, or a little water, which are
available in every part of the world, can be offered by any person,
regardless of social position, and will be accepted if offered with
love. There are many instances in history. Simply by tasting the tulasi
leaves offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, great sages like Sanat-
kumara became great devotees. Therefore the devotional process is very
nice, and it can be executed in a happy mood. God accepts only the love
with which things are offered to Him.
It is said here that this devotional service is eternally existing. It
is not as the Mayavadi philosophers claim. They sometimes take to so-
called devotional service, and as long as they are not liberated they
continue their devotional service, but at the end, when they become
liberated, they "become one with God." Such temporary time-serving
devotional service is not accepted as pure devotional service. Actual
devotional service continues even after liberation. When the devotee
goes to the spiritual planet in the kingdom of God, he is also engaged
there in serving the Supreme Lord. He does not try to become one with
the Supreme Lord.
As it will be seen, actual devotional service begins after liberation.
So in Bhagavad-gita it is said, brahma-bhuta, After being liberated, or
being situated in the Brahman position, one's devotional service
begins. By executing devotional service, one can understand the Supreme
Lord. No one can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
executing karma-yoga, jnana or astanga-yoga or any other yoga
independently. Without coming to the stage of devotional service, one
cannot understand what is the Personality of Godhead. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam it is also confirmed that when one becomes purified by
executing the process of devotional service, especially by hearing
Srimad-Bhagavatam or Bhagavad-gita from realized souls, then he can
understand the science of Krsna, or the science of God. Evam prasanna-
manaso bhagavad-bhakti yogatah. When one's heart is cleared of all
nonsense, then one can understand what God is. Thus the process of
devotional service, of Krsna consciousness, is the king of all
education and the king of all confidential knowledge. It is the purest
form of religion, and it can be executed joyfully without difficulty.
Therefore one should adopt it.
TEXT 3
asraddadhanah purusa
dharmasyasya parantapa
aprapya mam nivartante
mrtyu-samsara-vartmani
SYNONYMS
asraddadhanah--those who are faithless; purusah--such persons;
dharmasya--of this process of religion; asya--of it; parantapa--O
killer of the enemies; aprapya--without obtaining; mam--Me; nivartante-
-come back; mrtyu--death; samsara--material existence; vartmani--on the
path of.
TRANSLATION
Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot
attain Me, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this
material world.
PURPORT
The faithless cannot accomplish this process of devotional service;
that is the purport of this verse. Faith is created by association with
devotees. Unfortunate people, even after hearing all the evidence of
Vedic literature from great personalities, still have no faith in God.
They are hesitant and cannot stay fixed in the devotional service of
the Lord. Thus faith is a most important factor for progress in Krsna
consciousness. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is said that one should
have complete conviction that simply by serving the Supreme Lord Sri
Krsna he can achieve all perfection. That is called real faith. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (4.31.14) it is stated that by giving water to the
root of a tree, its branches, twigs and leaves become satisfied, and by
supplying food to the stomach all the senses of the body become
satisfied, and, similarly, by engaging in the transcendental service of
the Supreme Lord, all the demigods and all the living entities
automatically become satisfied.
There are three divisions of Krsna conscious men. In the third class
are those who have no faith. If they are engaged in devotional service
officially, for some ulterior purpose, they cannot achieve the highest
perfectional stage. Most probably they will slip, after some time. They
may become engaged, but because they haven't complete conviction and
faith, it is very difficult for them to continue in Krsna
consciousness. We have practical experience in discharging our
missionary activity that some people come and apply themselves to Krsna
consciousness with some hidden motive, and as soon as they are
economically a little well situated they give up this process and take
to their old ways again. It is only by faith that one can advance in
Krsna consciousness. As far as the development of faith is concerned,
one who is well versed in the literatures of devotional service and has
attained the stage of firm faith is called a first-class person in
Krsna consciousness. And in the second-class are those who are not very
advanced in understanding the devotional scriptures but who
automatically have firm faith that krsna-bhakti or service to Krsna is
the best course and so in good faith have taken it up. Thus they are
superior to the third-class who have neither perfect knowledge of the
scriptures nor good faith but by association and simplicity are trying
to follow. The third-class person in Krsna consciousness may fall down,
but when one is in the second-class or first-class he does not fall
down. One in the first-class will surely make progress and achieve the
result at the end. As far as the third-class person in Krsna
consciousness is concerned, although he has faith in the conviction
that devotional service to Krsna is very good, he has no knowledge of
Krsna through the scriptures like Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita.
Sometimes these third-class persons in Krsna consciousness have some
tendency toward karma-yoga and jnana-yoga, and sometimes they are
disturbed, but as soon as the infection of karma-yoga or jnana-yoga is
vanquished, they become second-class or first-class persons in Krsna
consciousness. Faith in Krsna is also divided into three stages and
described in Srimad-Bhagavatam. First-class attachment, second-class
attachment, and third-class attachment are also explained in Srimad-
Bhagavatam in the Eleventh Canto. Those who have no faith even after
hearing about Krsna and the excellence of devotional service, who think
that it is simply eulogy, find the path very difficult, even if they
are supposedly engaged in devotional service. For them there is very
little hope in gaining perfection. Thus faith is very important in the
discharge of devotional service.
TEXT 4
maya tatam idam sarvam
jagad avyakta-murtina
mat-sthani sarva-bhutani
na caham tesv avasthitah
SYNONYMS
maya--by Me; tatam--spread; idam--all these manifestations; sarvam--
all; jagat--cosmic manifestation; avyakta-murtina--unmanifested form;
mat-sthani--unto Me; sarva-bhutani--all living entities; na--not; ca--
also; aham--I; tesu--in them; avasthitah--situated.
TRANSLATION
By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All
beings are in Me, but I am not in them.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the gross
material senses. It is said that Lord Sri Krsna's name, fame, pastimes,
etc., cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who is
engaged in pure devotional service under proper guidance is He
revealed. In the Brahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-
cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti: one can
see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always within himself
and outside himself if he has developed the transcendental loving
attitude towards Him. Thus for people in general He is not visible.
Here it is said that although He is all-pervading, everywhere present,
He is yet not conceivable by the material senses. But actually,
although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him. As we have
discussed in the Seventh Chapter, the entire material cosmic
manifestation is only a combination of His two different energies, the
superior spiritual energy and the inferior material energy. Just as the
sunshine is spread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord is
spread all over the creation, and everything is resting in that energy.
Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has
lost His personal existence. To refute such an argument the Lord says,
"I am everywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof." For
example, a king heads a government which is but the manifestation of
the king's energy; the different governmental departments are nothing
but the energies of the king, and each department is resting on the
king's power. But still one cannot expect the king to be present in
every department personally. That is a crude example. Similarly, all
the manifestations that we see, and everything that exists both in this
material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by the
diffusion of His different energies, and, as it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gita, He is everywhere present by His personal representation,
the diffusion of His different energies.
TEXT 5
na ca mat-sthani bhutani
pasya me yogam aisvaram
bhuta-bhrn na ca bhuta-stho
mamatma bhuta-bhavanah
SYNONYMS
na--never; ca--also; mat-sthani--situated in Me; bhutani--all creation;
pasya--just see; me--My; yogam aisvaram--inconceivable mystic power;
bhuta-bhrt--maintainer of all living entities; na--never; ca--also;
bhuta-sthah--in the cosmic manifestation; mama--My; atma--Self; bhuta-
bhavanah--is the source of all manifestations.
TRANSLATION
And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My
mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities,
and although I am everywhere, still My Self is the very source of
creation.
PURPORT
The Lord says that everything is resting on Him. This should not be
misunderstood. The Lord is not directly concerned with the maintenance
and sustenance of this material manifestation. Sometimes we see a
picture of Atlas holding the globe on his shoulders; he seems to be
very tired, holding this great earthly planet. Such an image should not
be entertained in connection with Krsna's upholding this created
universe. He says that although everything is resting on Him, still He
is aloof. The planetary systems are floating in space, and this space
is the energy of the Supreme Lord. But He is different from space. He
is differently situated. Therefore the Lord says, "Although they are
situated on My inconceivable energy, still, as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, I am aloof from them." This is the inconceivable opulence
of the Lord.
In the Vedic dictionary it is said, "The Supreme Lord is performing
inconceivably wonderful pastimes, displaying His energy. His person is
full of different potent energies, and His determination is itself
actual fact. In this way the Personality of Godhead is to be
understood." We may think to doing something, but there are so many
impediments, and sometimes it is not possible to do as we like. But
when Krsna wants to do something, simply by His willing, everything is
performed so perfectly that one cannot imagine how it is being done.
The Lord explains this fact: although He is the maintainer and
sustainer of the entire material manifestation, He does not touch this
material manifestation. Simply by His supreme will everything is
created, everything is sustained, everything is maintained, and
everything is annihilated. There is no difference between His mind and
Himself (as there is a difference between ourselves and our present
material mind) because He is absolute spirit. Simultaneously the Lord
is present in everything; yet the common man cannot understand how He
is also present personally. He is different from this material
manifestation, yet everything is resting on Him. This is explained here
as yogam aisvaram, the mystic power of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
TEXT 6
yathakasa-sthito nityam
vayuh sarvatra-go mahan
tatha sarvani bhutani
mat-sthanity upadharaya
SYNONYMS
yatha--as much as; akasa-sthitah--situated in space; nityam--always;
vayuh--wind; sarvatra-gah--blowing everywhere; mahan--great; tatha--
similarly; sarvani--everything; bhutani--created beings; mat-sthani--
situated in Me; iti--thus; upadharaya--try to understand.
TRANSLATION
As the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, always rests in ethereal space,
know that in the same manner all beings rest in Me.
PURPORT
For the ordinary person it is almost inconceivable how the huge
material creation is resting in Him. But the Lord is giving an example
which may help us to understand. Space is the biggest manifestation we
can conceive. The cosmic manifestation rests in space. Space permits
the movement of even the atoms and on up to the greatest planets, the
Sun and the Moon. Although the sky (or wind or air) is great, still it
is situated within space. Space is not beyond the sky.
In the Upanisads, it is stated, "It is out of the fear of the Supreme
Lord that the wind is blowing." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.8.1) In the
Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad (3.8.9) it is stated, "By the supreme order,
under the superintendence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
moon, the sun, and other great planets are moving." In the Brahma-
samhita (5.52) this is also stated. There is also a description of the
movement of the sun, and it is said that the sun is considered to be
one of the eyes of the Supreme Lord and that it has immense potency to
diffuse heat and light. Still it is moving in its prescribed orbit by
the order and the supreme will of Govinda. So, from the Vedic
literature we can find evidence that this material manifestation, which
appears to us to be very wonderful and great, is under the complete
control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This will be further
explained in the later verses of this chapter.
TEXT 7
sarva-bhutani kaunteya
prakrtim yanti mamikam
kalpa-ksaye punas tani
kalpadau visrjamy aham
SYNONYMS
sarva-bhutani--all created entities; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
prakrtim--nature; yanti--enter; mamikam--unto Me; kalpa-ksaye--at the
end of the millennium; punah--again; tani--all those; kalpa-adau--in
the beginning of the millennium; visrjami--I create; aham--I.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti at the end of the millennium every material
manifestation enters into My nature, and at the beginning of another
millennium, by My potency, I again create.
PURPORT
The creation, maintenance and annihilation of this material cosmic
manifestation is completely dependent on the supreme will of the
Personality of Godhead. "At the end of the millennium" means at the
death of Brahma. Brahma lives for one hundred years, and his one day is
calculated at 4,300,000,000 of our earthly years. His night is of the
same duration. His month consists of thirty such days and nights, and
his year of twelve months. After one hundred such years, when Brahma
dies, the devastation or annihilation takes place; this means that the
energy manifested by the Supreme Lord is again wound up in Himself.
Then again, when there is need to manifest the cosmic world, it is done
by His will: "Although I am one, I shall become many." This is the
Vedic aphorism (Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.3). He expands Himself in this
material energy, and the whole cosmic manifestation again takes place.
TEXT 8
prakrtim svam avastabhya
visrjami punah punah
bhuta-gramam imam krtsnam
avasam prakrter vasat
SYNONYMS
prakrtim--material nature; svam--of My personal Self; avastabhya--enter
in; visrjami--create; punah punah--again, again; bhuta-gramam--all
these cosmic manifestations; imam--this; krtsnam--total; avasam--
automatically; prakrteh--by the force of nature; vasat--under
obligation.
TRANSLATION
The whole cosmic order is under Me. By My will it is manifested again
and again, and by My will it is annihilated at the end.
PURPORT
This matter is the manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This has already been explained several times.
At the creation, the material energy is let loose as the mahat-tattva,
into which the Lord as His first Purusa incarnation, Maha-Visnu,
enters. He lies within the Causal Ocean and breathes out innumerable
universes, and into each universe the Lord again enters as
Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Each universe is in that way created. He still
further manifests Himself as Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and that Visnu enters
into everything--even into the minute atom. This fact is explained
here. He enters into everything.
Now, as far as the living entities are concerned, they are impregnated
into this material nature, and as a result of their past deeds they
take different positions. Thus the activities of this material world
begin. The activities of the different species of living beings are
begun from the very moment of the creation. It is not that all is
evolved. The different species of life are created immediately along
with the universe. Men, animals, beasts, birds--everything is
simultaneously created, because whatever desires the living entities
had at the last annihilation are again manifested. It is clearly stated
here that the living entities have nothing to do with this process. The
state of being in their past life in the past creation is simply
manifested again, and all this is done simply by His will. This is the
inconceivable potency of the Supreme Personality of God. And after
creating different species of life, He has no connection with them. The
creation takes place to accommodate the inclinations of the various
living entities, and so the Lord does not become involved with it.
TEXT 9
na ca mam tani karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
udasina-vad asinam
asaktam tesu karmasu
SYNONYMS
na--never; ca--also; mam--Me; tani--all those; karmani--activities;
nibadhnanti--bind; dhananjaya--O conqueror of riches; udasina-vat--as
neutral; asinam--situated; asaktam--without attraction; tesu--in them;
karmasu--in activities.
TRANSLATION
O Dhananjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached, seated
as though neutral.
PURPORT
One should not think, in this connection, that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead has no engagement. In His spiritual world He is always
engaged. In the Brahma-samhita (5.6) it is stated, "He is always
involved in His eternal, blissful, spiritual activities, but He has
nothing to do with these material activities." Material activities are
being carried on by His different potencies. The Lord is always neutral
in the material activities of the created world. This neutrality is
explained here. Although He has control over every minute detail of
matter, He is sitting as if neutral. The example can be given of a high
court judge sitting on his bench. By his order so many things are
happening: someone is being hanged, someone is being put into jail,
someone is awarded a huge amount of wealth--but still he is neutral. He
has nothing to do with all that gain and loss. Similarly, the Lord is
always neutral, although He has His hand in every sphere of activity.
In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it is stated that He is not situated in
the dualities of this material world. He is transcendental to these
dualities. Nor is He attached to the creation and annihilation of this
material world. The living entities take their different forms in the
various species of life according to their past deeds, and the Lord
doesn't interfere with them.
TEXT 10
mayadhyaksena prakrtih
suyate sa-caracaram
hetunanena kaunteya
jagad viparivartate
SYNONYMS
maya--by Me; adhyaksena--by superintendence; prakrtih--material nature;
suyate--manifests; sa--with; cara-acaram--the moving and the nonmoving;
hetuna--for this reason; anena--this; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; jagat--
the cosmic manifestation; viparivartate--is working.
TRANSLATION
This material nature is working under My direction, O son of Kunti, and
it is producing all moving and unmoving beings. By its rule this
manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated here that the Supreme Lord, although aloof from
all the activities of the material world, remains the supreme director.
The Supreme Lord is the supreme will and the background of this
material manifestation, but the management is being conducted by
material nature. Krsna also states in Bhagavad-gita that of all of the
living entities in different forms and species, "I am the father." The
father gives seeds to the womb of the mother for the child, and
similarly the Supreme Lord by His mere glance injects all the living
entities into the womb of material nature, and they come out in their
different forms and species, according to their last desires and
activities. All these living entities, although born under the glance
of the Supreme Lord, still take their different bodies according to
their past deeds and desires. So the Lord is not directly attached to
this material creation. He simply glances over material nature;
material nature is thus activated, and everything is created
immediately. Because He glances over material nature, there is
undoubtedly activity on the part of the Supreme Lord, but He has
nothing to do with the manifestation of the material world directly.
This example is given in the smrti: when there is a fragrant flower
before someone, the fragrance is touched by the smelling power of the
person, yet the smelling and the flower are detached from one another.
There is a similar connection between the material world and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; actually He has nothing to do with this
material world, but He creates by His glance and ordains. In summary,
material nature, without the superintendence of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, cannot do anything. Yet the Supreme Personality is detached
from all material activities.
TEXT 11
avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum asritam
param bhavam ajananto
mama bhuta-mahesvaram
SYNONYMS
avajananti--deride; mam--Me; mudhah--foolish men; manusim--in human
form; tanum--body; asritam--assuming; param--transcendental; bhavam--
nature; ajanantah--not knowing; mama--Mine; bhuta--everything that be;
maha-isvaram--the supreme proprietor.
TRANSLATION
Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My
transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over all that be.
PURPORT
From the other explanations of the previous verses in this chapter, it
is clear that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing
like a human being, is not a common man. The Personality of Godhead,
who conducts the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the complete
cosmic manifestation, cannot be a human being. Yet there are many
foolish men who consider Krsna to be merely a powerful man and nothing
more. Actually, He is the original Supreme Personality, as is confirmed
in the Brahma-samhita (isvarah paramah krsnah); He is the Supreme Lord.
There are many isvaras, controllers, and one appears greater than
another. In the ordinary management of affairs in the material world,
we find some official or director, and above him there is a secretary,
and above him a minister, and above him a president. Each of them is a
controller, but one is controlled by another. In the Brahma-samhita it
is said that Krsna is the supreme controller; there are many
controllers undoubtedly, both in the material and spiritual world, but
Krsna is the supreme controller (isvarah paramah krsnah) and His body
is sac-cid-ananda, nonmaterial.
Material bodies cannot perform the wonderful acts described in previous
verses. His body is eternal, blissful and full of knowledge. Although
He is not a common man, the foolish deride Him and consider Him to be a
man. His body is called here manusim because He is acting just like a
man, a friend of Arjuna's, a politician involved in the Battle of
Kuruksetra. In so many ways He is acting just like an ordinary man, but
actually His body is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--eternal bliss and
knowledge absolute. This is confirmed in the Vedic language also. Sac-
cid-ananda-rupaya krsnaya: "I offer my obeisances unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, who is the eternal blissful form of
knowledge." (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.1) There are other descriptions
in the Vedic language also. Tam ekam govindam: "You are Govinda, the
pleasure of the senses and the cows." Sac-cid-ananda-vigraham: "And
Your form is transcendental, full of knowledge, bliss and eternality."
(Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.35)
Despite the transcendental qualities of Lord Krsna's body, its full
bliss and knowledge, there are many so-called scholars and commentators
of Bhagavad-gita who deride Krsna as an ordinary man. The scholar may
be born an extraordinary man due to his previous good work, but this
conception of Sri Krsna is due to a poor fund of knowledge. Therefore
he is called mudha, for only foolish persons consider Krsna to be an
ordinary human being because they do not know the confidential
activities of the Supreme Lord and His different energies. They do not
know that Krsna's body is a symbol of complete knowledge and bliss,
that He is the proprietor of everything that be and that He can award
liberation to anyone. Because they do not know that Krsna has so many
transcendental qualifications, they deride Him.
Nor do they know that the appearance of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in this material world is a manifestation of His internal
energy. He is the master of the material energy. As has been explained
in several places (mama maya duratyaya), He claims that the material
energy, although very powerful, is under His control, and whoever
surrenders unto Him can get out of the control of this material energy.
If a soul surrendered to Krsna can get out of the influence of material
energy, then how can the Supreme Lord, who conducts the creation,
maintenance and annihilation of the whole cosmic nature, have a
material body like us? So this conception of Krsna is complete
foolishness. Foolish persons, however, cannot conceive that the
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, appearing just like an ordinary man, can
be the controller of all the atoms and of the gigantic manifestation of
the universal form. The biggest and the minutest are beyond their
conception, so they cannot imagine that a form like that of a human
being can simultaneously control the infinite and the minute. Actually
although He is controlling the infinite and the finite, He is apart
from all this manifestation. It is clearly stated concerning His yogam
aisvaram, His inconceivable transcendental energy, that He can control
the infinite and the finite simultaneously and that He can remain aloof
from them. Although the foolish cannot imagine how Krsna, who appears
just like a human being, can control the infinite and the finite, those
who are pure devotees accept this, for they know that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore they completely surrender
unto Him and engage in Krsna consciousness, devotional service of the
Lord.
There are many controversies amongst the impersonalists and the
personalists about the Lord's appearance as a human being. But if we
consult Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, the authoritative texts
for understanding the science of Krsna, then we can understand that
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is not an ordinary man,
although He appeared on this earth as an ordinary human. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam, First Canto, First Chapter, when the sages inquire about
the activities of Krsna, it is stated that His appearance as a man
bewilders the foolish. No human being could perform the wonderful acts
that Krsna performed while He was present on this earth. When Krsna
appeared before His father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki, He appeared
with four hands, but after the prayers of the parents, He transformed
Himself into an ordinary child. His appearance as an ordinary human
being is one of the features of His transcendental body. In the
Eleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita also it is stated that Arjuna prayed
to see Krsna's form of four hands (tenaiva rupena catur-bhujena).
Arjuna prayed to see again that form of four hands, and when Krsna was
thus petitioned by Arjuna, He again assumed His original form. All
these different features of the Supreme Lord are certainly not those of
an ordinary human being.
Some of those who deride Krsna, who are infected with the Mayavadi,
philosophy quote the following verse from the Srimad-Bhagavatam
(3.29.21) to prove that Krsna is just an ordinary man. Aham sarvesu
bhutesu bhutatmavasthitah sada: "The Supreme is present in every living
entity." We should better take note of this particular verse from the
Vaisnava acaryas like Jiva Gosvami instead of following the
interpretation of unauthorized persons who deride Krsna. Jiva Gosvami,
commenting on this verse, says that Krsna, in His plenary expansion as
Paramatma, is situated in the moving and the nonmoving entities as the
Supersoul, so any neophyte devotee who simply gives his attention to
the arca-murti, the form of the Supreme Lord in the temple, and does
not respect other living entities is uselessly worshiping the form of
the Lord in the temple. There are three kinds of devotees of the Lord,
and the neophyte is in the lowest stage. The neophyte devotee gives
more attention to the Deity in the temple than to other devotees, so
Jiva Gosvami warns that this sort of mentality should be corrected. A
devotee should see that Krsna is present in everyone's heart as
Paramatma; therefore every body is the embodiment of or the temple of
the Supreme Lord, and as such, as one offers respect to the temple of
the Lord, he should similarly properly respect each and every body in
whom the Paramatma dwells. Everyone should therefore be given proper
respect and should not be neglected.
There are also many impersonalists who deride temple worship. They say
that since God is everywhere, why should one restrict himself to temple
worship? But if God is everywhere, is He not in the temple or in the
Deity? Although the personalist and the impersonalist will fight with
one another perpetually, a perfect devotee in Krsna consciousness knows
that although Krsna is the Supreme Personality, He is all-pervading, as
is confirmed in the Brahma-samhita. Although His personal abode is
Goloka Vrndavana and He is always staying there, still, by His
different manifestations of energy and by His plenary expansion, He is
present everywhere in all parts of the material and spiritual
creations.
TEXT 12
moghasa mogha-karmano
mogha-jnana vicetasah
raksasim asurim caiva
prakrtim mohinim sritah
SYNONYMS
mogha-asah--baffled 
hope; 
mogha-karmanah--baffled 
in 
fruitive
activities; mogha-jnanah--baffled in knowledge; vicetasah--bewildered;
raksasim--demonic; 
asurim--atheistic; 
ca--and; 
eva--certainly;
prakrtim--nature; mohinim--bewildering; sritah--taking shelter of.
TRANSLATION
Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic
views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their
fruitive activities, and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.
PURPORT
There are many devotees who assume themselves to be in Krsna
consciousness and devotional service but at heart do not accept the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, as the Absolute Truth. For them,
the fruit of devotional service--going back to Godhead--will never be
tasted. Similarly, those who are engaged in fruitive, pious activities
and who are ultimately hoping to be liberated from this material
entanglement will never be successful either because they deride the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. In other words, persons who mock
Krsna are to be understood to be demonic or atheistic. As described in
the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, such demonic miscreants never
surrender to Krsna. Therefore their mental speculations to arrive at
the Absolute Truth bring them to the false conclusion that the ordinary
living entity and Krsna are one and the same. With such a false
conviction, they think that the body of any human being is now simply
covered by material nature and that as soon as one is liberated from
this material body there is no difference between God and himself. This
attempt to become one with Krsna will be baffled because of delusion.
Such atheistic and demoniac cultivation of spiritual knowledge is
always futile. That is the indication of this verse. For such persons,
cultivation of the knowledge in the Vedic literature, like the Vedanta-
sutra and the Upanisads, is always baffled.
It is a great offense, therefore, to consider Krsna, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, to be an ordinary man. Those who do so are
certainly deluded because they cannot understand the eternal form of
Krsna. In the Brhad-viasnava mantra it is clearly stated that one who
considers the body of Krsna to be material should be driven out from
all rituals and activities of the sruti. And if one by chance sees his
face, he should at once take bath in the Ganges to rid himself of
infection. People jeer at Krsna because they are envious of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Their destiny is certainly to take birth after
birth in the species of atheistic and demoniac life. Perpetually, their
real knowledge will remain under delusion, and gradually they will
regress to the darkest region of creation.
TEXT 13
mahatmanas tu mam partha
daivim prakrtim asritah
bhajanty ananya-manaso
jnatva bhutadim avyayam
SYNONYMS
maha-atmanah--the great souls; tu--but; mam--unto Me; partha--O son of
Prtha; daivim--divine; prakrtim--nature; asritah--taken shelter of;
bhajanti--render service; ananya-manasah--without deviation of the
mind; jnatva--knowing; bhuta--creation; adim--original; avyayam--
inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under
the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in
devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, original and inexhaustible.
PURPORT
In this verse the description of mahatma is clearly given. The first
sign of the mahatma is that he is already situated in the divine
nature. He is not under the control of material nature. And how is this
effected? That is explained in the Seventh Chapter: one who surrenders
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, at once becomes
freed from the control of material nature. That is the qualification.
One can become free from the control of material nature as soon as he
surrenders his soul to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the
preliminary formula. Being marginal potency, as soon as the living
entity is freed from the control of material nature, he is put under
the guidance of the spiritual nature. The guidance of the spiritual
nature is called daivi prakrti, divine nature. So when one is promoted
in that way--by surrendering to the Supreme Personality of Godhead--one
attains to the stage of great soul, mahatma.
The mahatma does not divert his attention to anything outside Krsna
because he knows perfectly well that Krsna is the original Supreme
Person, the cause of all causes. There is no doubt about it. Such a
mahatma, or great soul, develops through association with other
mahatmas, pure devotees. Pure devotees are not even attracted by
Krsna's other features, such as the four-armed Maha-Visnu. They are
simply attracted by the two-armed form of Krsna. Since they are not
attracted to other features of Krsna (what to speak of the demigods),
they are mot concerned with any form of a demigod or of a human being.
They only meditate upon Krsna in Krsna consciousness. They are always
engaging in the unswerving service of the Lord in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 14
satatam kirtayanto mam
yatantas ca drdha-vratah
namasyantas ca mam bhaktya
nitya-yukta upasate
SYNONYMS
satatam--always; kirtayantah--chanting; mam--Me; yatantah ca--fully
endeavoring also; drdha-vratah--with determination; namasyantah ca--
offering obeisances; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; nitya-yuktah--
perpetually engaged; upasate--worship.
TRANSLATION
Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with
devotion.
PURPORT
The mahatma cannot be manufactured by rubber-stamping an ordinary man.
His symptoms are described here: a mahatma is always engaged in
chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord Krsna, the Personality of
Godhead. He has no other business. He is always engaged in the
glorification of the Lord. In other words, he is not an impersonalist.
When the question of glorification is there, one has to glorify the
Supreme Lord, praising His holy name, His eternal form, His
transcendental qualities and His uncommon pastimes. One has to glorify
all these things; therefore a mahatma is attached to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
One who is attached to the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord, the
brahmajyoti, is not described as mahatma in the Bhagavad-gita. He is
described in a different way in the next verse. The mahatma is always
engaged in different activities of devotional service, as described in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam, hearing and chanting about Visnu, not a demigod
or human being. That is devotion: sravanam kirtanam visnoh and
smaranam, remembering Him. Such a mahatma has firm determination to
achieve at the ultimate end the association of the Supreme Lord in any
one of the five transcendental rasas. To achieve that success, he
engages all activities--mental, bodily and vocal, everything--in the
service of the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna. That is called full Krsna
consciousness.
In devotional service there are certain activities which are called
determined, such as fasting on certain days, like the eleventh day of
the moon, Ekadasi, and on the appearance day of the Lord, etc. All
these rules and regulations are offered by the great acaryas for those
who are actually interested in getting admission into the association
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the transcendental world. The
mahatmas, great souls, strictly observe all these rules and
regulations, and therefore they are sure to achieve the desired result.
As described in the second verse of this chapter, this devotional
service is not only easy, but it can be performed in a happy mood. One
does not need to undergo any severe penance and austerity. He can live
this life in devotional service, guided by an expert spiritual master,
and in any position, either as a householder or a sannyasi or a
brahmacari; in any position and anywhere in the world, he can perform
this devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thus
become actually mahatma, a great soul.
TEXT 15
jnana-yajnena capy anye
yajanto mam upasate
ekatvena prthaktvena
bahudha visvato-mukham
SYNONYMS
jnana-yajnena--by cultivation of knowledge; ca--also; api--certainly;
anye--others; 
yajantah--worshiping; 
mam--Me; 
upasate--worship;
ekatvena--in oneness; prthaktvena--in duality; bahudha--diversity;
visvatah-mukham--in the universal form.
TRANSLATION
Others, who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, worship the
Supreme Lord as the one without a second, diverse in many, and in the
universal form.
PURPORT
This verse is the summary of the previous verses. The Lord tells Arjuna
that those who are purely in Krsna consciousness and do not know
anything other than Krsna are called mahatma; yet there are other
persons who are not exactly in the position of mahatma but who worship
Krsna also, in different ways. Some of them are already described as
the distressed, the financially destitute, the inquisitive, and those
who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge. But there are others
who are still lower, and these are divided into three: 1) he who
worships himself as one with the Supreme Lord, 2) he who concocts some
form of the Supreme Lord and worships that, and 3) he who accepts the
universal form, the visvarupa of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and worships that. Out of the above three, the lowest, those who
worship themselves as the Supreme Lord, thinking themselves to be
monists, are most predominant. Such people think themselves to be the
Supreme Lord, and in this mentality they worship themselves. This is
also a type of God worship, for they can understand that they are not
the material body but are actually spiritual soul; at least, such a
sense is prominent. Generally the impersonalists worship the Supreme
Lord in this way. The second class includes the worshipers of the
demigods, those who by imagination consider any form to be the form of
the Supreme Lord. And the third class includes those who cannot
conceive of anything beyond the manifestation of this material
universe. They consider the universe to be the supreme organism or
entity and worship that. The universe is also a form of the Lord.
TEXT 16
aham kratur aham yajnah
svadhaham aham ausadham
mantro 'ham aham evajyam
aham agnir aham hutam
SYNONYMS
aham--I; kratuh--ritual; aham--I; yajnah--sacrifice; svadha--oblation;
aham--I; aham--I; ausadham--healing herb; mantrah--transcendental
chant; aham--I; aham--I; eva--certainly; ajyam--melted butter; aham--I;
agnih--fire; aham--I; hutam--offering.
TRANSLATION
But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the
ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butter
and the fire and the offering.
PURPORT
The sacrifice known as jyotistoma is also Krsna, and He is also the
maha-yajna. The oblations offered to the Pitrloka or the sacrifice
performed to please the Pitrloka, considered as a kind of drug in the
form of clarified butter, is also Krsna. The mantras chanted in this
connection are also Krsna. And many other commodities made with milk
products for offering in the sacrifices are also Krsna. The fire is
also Krsna because fire is one of the five material elements and is
therefore claimed as the separated energy of Krsna. In other words, the
Vedic sacrifices recommended in the karma-kanda division of the Vedas
are in total also Krsna. Or, in other words, those who are engaged in
rendering devotional service unto Krsna are to be understood to have
performed all the sacrifices recommended in the Vedas.
TEXT 17
pitaham asya jagato
mata dhata pitamahah
vedyam pavitram omkara
rk sama yajur eva ca
SYNONYMS
pita--father; aham--I; asya--of this; jagatah--of the universe; mata--
mother; dhata--supporter; pitamahah--grandfather; vedyam--what is to be
known; pavitram--that which purifies; om-kara--the syllable om; rk--the
Rg Veda; sama--the Sama Veda; yajuh--the Yajur Veda; eva--certainly;
ca--and.
TRANSLATION
I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the
grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable
om. I am also the Rg, the Sama, and the Yajur [Vedas].
PURPORT
The entire cosmic manifestations, moving and nonmoving, are manifested
by different activities of Krsna's energy. In the material existence we
create different relationships with different living entities who are
nothing but Krsna's marginal energy, but under the creation of prakrti
some of them appear as our father, mother, grandfather, creator, etc.,
but actually they are parts and parcels of Krsna. As such, these living
entities who appear to be our father, mother, etc., are nothing but
Krsna. In this verse the word dhata means "creator." Not only are our
father and mother parts and parcels of Krsna, but their creator,
grandmother and grandfather, etc., are also Krsna. Actually any living
entity, being part and parcel of Krsna, is Krsna. All the Vedas,
therefore, aim only toward Krsna. Whatever we want to know through the
Vedas is but a progressive step to understanding Krsna. That subject
matter which helps us purify our constitutional position is especially
Krsna. Similarly, the living entity who is inquisitive to understand
all Vedic principles is also part and parcel of Krsna and as such is
also Krsna. In all the Vedic mantras the word om, called pranava, is a
transcendental sound vibration and is also Krsna. And because in all
the hymns of the four Vedas, Sama, Yajur, Rg and Atharva, the pranava
or omkara, is very prominent, it is understood to be Krsna.
TEXT 18
gatir bharta prabhuh saksi
nivasah saranam suhrt
prabhavah pralayah sthanam
nidhanam bijam avyayam
SYNONYMS
gatih--goal; bharta--sustainer; prabhuh--Lord; saksi--witness; nivasah-
-abode; saranam--refuge; su-hrt--most intimate friend; prabhavah--
creation; pralayah--dissolution; sthanam--ground; nidhanam--resting
place; bijam--seed; avyayam--imperishable.
TRANSLATION
I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the
refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the
annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and the
eternal seed.
PURPORT
Gati means the destination where we want to go. But the ultimate goal
is Krsna, although people do not know it. One who does not know Krsna
is misled, and his so-called progressive march is either partial or
hallucinatory. There are many who make as their destination different
demigods, and by rigid performance of the strict respective methods
they reach different planets known as Candraloka, Suryaloka, Indraloka,
Maharloka, etc. But all such lokas, or planets, being creations of
Krsna, are simultaneously Krsna and not Krsna. Actually such planets,
being manifestations of Krsna's energy, are also Krsna, but actually
they serve only as a step forward for realization of Krsna. To approach
the different energies of Krsna is to approach Krsna indirectly. One
should directly approach Krsna, for that will save time and energy. For
example, if there is a possibility of going to the top of a building by
the help of an elevator, why should one go by the staircase, step by
step? Everything is resting on Krsna's energy; therefore without
Krsna's shelter nothing can exist. Krsna is the supreme ruler because
everything belongs to Him and everything exists on His energy. Krsna,
being situated in everyone's heart, is the supreme witness. The
residences, countries or planets on which we live are also Krsna. Krsna
is the ultimate goal of shelter, and as such one should take shelter of
Krsna either for protection or for annihilation of his distressed
condition. And whenever we have to take protection, we should know that
our protection must be a living force. Thus Krsna is the supreme living
entity. Since Krsna is the source of our generation, or the supreme
father, no one can be a better friend than Krsna, nor can anyone be a
better well-wisher. Krsna is the original source of creation and the
ultimate rest after annihilation. Krsna is therefore the eternal cause
of all causes.
TEXT 19
tapamy aham aham varsam
nigrhnamy utsrjami ca
amrtam caiva mrtyus ca
sad asac caham arjuna
SYNONYMS
tapami--give heat; aham--I; aham--I; varsam--rain; nigrhnami--withhold;
utsrjami--send forth; ca--and; amrtam--immortality; ca--and; eva--
certainly; mrtyuh--death; ca--and; sat--being; asat--nonbeing; ca--and;
aham--I; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
O Arjuna, I control heat, the rain and the drought. I am immortality,
and I am also death personified. Both being and nonbeing are in Me.
PURPORT
Krsna, by His different energies, diffuses heat and light through the
agency of electricity and the sun. During summer season it is Krsna who
checks rain from falling from the sky, and then during the rainy season
He gives unceasing torrents of rain. The energy which sustains us by
prolonging the duration of our life is Krsna, and Krsna meets us at the
end as death. By analyzing all these different energies of Krsna, one
can ascertain that for Krsna there is no distinction between matter and
spirit, or, in other words, He is both matter and spirit. In the
advanced stage of Krsna consciousness, one does not therefore make such
distinctions. He sees Krsna only in everything.
Since Krsna is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal form
comprising all material manifestations is also Krsna, and His pastimes
in Vrndavana as two-handed Syamasundara, playing on a flute, are those
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 20
trai-vidya mam soma-pah puta-papa
yajnair istva svar-gatim prarthayante
te punyam asadya surendra-lokam
asnanti divyan divi deva-bhogan
SYNONYMS
trai-vidyah--the knowers of the three Vedas; mam--unto Me; soma-pah--
drinkers of soma juice; puta--purified; papah--sins; yajnaih--with
sacrifices; istva--after worshiping; svah-gatim--passage to heaven;
prarthayante--pray; te--they; punyam--virtue; asadya--enjoying; sura-
indra--of Indra; lokam--the world; asnanti--enjoy; divyan--celestial;
divi--in heaven; deva-bhogan--pleasures of the gods.
TRANSLATION
Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the
heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. They take birth on the planet
of Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.
PURPORT
The word trai-vidyah refers to the three Vedas, Sama, Yajur and Rg. A
brahmana who has studied these three Vedas is called a tri-vedi. Anyone
who is very much attached to knowledge derived from these three Vedas
is respected in society. Unfortunately, there are many great scholars
of the Vedas who do not know the ultimate purport of studying them.
Therefore Krsna herein declares Himself to be the ultimate goal for the
tri-vedis. Actual tri-vedis take shelter under the lotus feet of Krsna
and engage in pure devotional service to satisfy the Lord. Devotional
service begins with the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra and side by
side trying to understand Krsna in truth. Unfortunately those who are
simply official students of the Vedas become more interested in
offering sacrifices to the different demigods like Indra, Candra, etc.
By such endeavor, the worshipers of different demigods are certainly
purified of the contamination of the lower qualities of nature and are
thereby elevated to the higher planetary systems or heavenly planets
known as Maharloka, Janoloka, Tapoloka, etc. Once situated on those
higher planetary systems, one can satisfy his senses hundreds of
thousands of times better than on this planet.
TEXT 21
te tam bhuktva svarga-lokam visalam
ksine punye martya-lokam visanti
evam trayi-dharmam anuprapanna
gatagatam kama-kama labhante
SYNONYMS
te--they; tam--that; bhuktva--enjoying; svarga-lokam--heaven; visalam--
vast; ksine--being exhausted; punye--merits; martya-lokam--mortal
earth; visanti--fall down; evam--thus; trayi--three Vedas; dharmam--
doctrines; anuprapannah--following; gata-agatam--death and birth; kama-
kamah--desiring sense enjoyments; labhante--attain.
TRANSLATION
When they have thus enjoyed heavenly sense pleasure, they return to
this mortal planet again. Thus, through the Vedic principles, they
achieve only flickering happiness.
PURPORT
One who is promoted to those higher planetary systems enjoys a longer
duration of life and better facilities for sense enjoyment, yet one is
not allowed to stay there forever. One is again sent back to this
earthly planet upon finishing the resultant fruits of pious activities.
He who has not attained perfection of knowledge, as indicated in the
Vedanta-sutra (janmady asya yatah), or, in other words, he who fails to
understand Krsna, the cause of all causes, becomes baffled in achieving
the ultimate goal of life and is thus subjected to the routine of being
promoted to the higher planets and then again coming down, as if
situated on a ferris wheel which sometimes goes up and sometimes comes
down. The purport is that instead of being elevated to the spiritual
world where there is no longer any possibility of coming down, one
simply revolves in the cycle of birth and death on higher and lower
planetary systems. One should better take to the spiritual world to
enjoy eternal life of full bliss and knowledge and never return to this
miserable material existence.
TEXT 22
ananyas cintayanto mam
ye janah paryupasate
tesam nityabhiyuktanam
yoga-ksemam vahamy aham
SYNONYMS
ananyah--no other; cintayantah--concentrating; mam--unto Me; ye--who;
janah--persons; paryupasate--properly worship; tesam--their; nitya--
always; abhiyuktanam--fixed in devotion; yoga-ksemam--requirements;
vahami--carry; aham--I.
TRANSLATION
But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendental
form--to them I carry what they lack and preserve what they have.
PURPORT
One who is unable to live for a moment without Krsna consciousness
cannot but think of Krsna twenty-four hours, being engaged in
devotional service by hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers,
worshiping, serving the lotus feet of the Lord, rendering other
services, cultivating friendship and surrendering fully to the Lord.
Such activities are all auspicious and full of spiritual potencies;
indeed, they make the devotee perfect in self-realization. Then his
only desire is to achieve the association of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is called yoga. By the mercy of the Lord, such a devotee
never comes back to this material condition of life. Ksema refers to
the merciful protection of the Lord. The Lord helps the devotee to
achieve Krsna consciousness by yoga, and when he becomes fully Krsna
conscious the Lord protects him from falling down to a miserable
conditioned life.
TEXT 23
ye 'py anya-devata-bhakta
yajante sraddhayanvitah
te 'pi mam eva kaunteya
yajanty avidhi-purvakam
SYNONYMS
ye--those; api--also; anya--other; devata--demigods; bhaktah--devotees;
yajante--worship; sraddhaya anvitah--with faith; te--they; api--also;
mam--Me; eva--even; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; yajanti--sacrifice;
avidhi-purvakam--in a wrong way.
TRANSLATION
Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really
meant for Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding.
PURPORT
"Persons who are engaged in the worship of demigods are not very
intelligent, although such worship is done to Me indirectly," Krsna
says. For example, when a man pours water on the leaves and branches of
a tree without pouring water on the root, he does so without sufficient
knowledge or without observing regulative principles. Similarly, the
process of rendering service to the different parts of the body is to
supply food to the stomach. The demigods are, so to speak, different
officers and directors in the government of the Supreme Lord. One has
to follow the laws made by the government, not by the officers or
directors. Similarly, everyone is to offer his worship to the Supreme
Lord only. That will automatically satisfy the different officers and
directors of the Lord. The officers and directors are engaged as
representatives of the government, and to offer some bribe to the
officers and directors is illegal. This is stated here as avidhi-
purvakam. In other words, Krsna does not approve the unnecessary
worship of the demigods.
TEXT 24
aham hi sarva-yajnanam
bhokta ca prabhur eva ca
na tu mam abhijananti
tattvenatas cyavanti te
SYNONYMS
aham--I; hi--surely; sarva--of all; yajnanam--sacrifices; bhokta--
enjoyer; ca--and; prabhuh--Lord; eva--also; ca--and; na--not; tu--but;
mam--Me; abhijananti--know; tattvena--in reality; atah--therefore;
cyavanti--fall down; te--they.
TRANSLATION
I am the only enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. Those who do
not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.
PURPORT
Here it is clearly stated that there are many types of yajna
performances recommended in the Vedic literatures, but actually all of
them are meant for satisfying the Supreme Lord. Yajna means Visnu. In
the Second Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is clearly stated that one
should only work for satisfying Yajna or Visnu. The perfectional form
of human civilization, known as varnasrama-dharma, is specifically
meant for satisfying Visnu. Therefore, Krsna says in this verse, "I am
the enjoyer of all sacrifices because I am the supreme master."
However, less intelligent persons, without knowing this fact, worship
demigods for temporary benefit. Therefore they fall down to material
existence and do not achieve the desired goal of life. If, however,
anyone has any material desire to be fulfilled, he had better pray for
it to the Supreme Lord (although that is not pure devotion), and he
will thus achieve the desired result.
TEXT 25
yanti deva-vrata devan
pitrn yanti pitr-vratah
bhutani yanti bhutejya
yanti mad-yajino 'pi mam
SYNONYMS
yanti--achieve; deva-vratah--worshipers of demigods; devan--to
demigods; pitrn--to ancestors; yanti--go; pitr-vratah--worshipers of
the ancestors; bhutani--to ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; bhuta-ijyah--
worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yanti--go; mat--My; yajinah--
devotees; api--also; mam--unto Me.
TRANSLATION
Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods;
those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings;
those who worship ancestors go to the ancestors; and those who worship
Me will live with Me.
PURPORT
If one has any desire to go to the moon, the sun, or any other planet,
one can attain the desired destination by following specific Vedic
principles recommended for that purpose. These are vividly described in
the fruitive activities portion of the Vedas, technically known as
darsa-paurnamasi, which recommends a specific worship of demigods
situated on different heavenly planets. Similarly, one can attain the
Pita planets by performing a specific yajna. Similarly, one can go to
many ghostly planets and become a Yaksa, Raksa or Pisaca. Pisaca
worship is called "black arts" or "black magic." There are many men who
practice this black art, and they think that it is spiritualism, but
such activities are completely materialistic. Similarly, a pure
devotee, who worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead only, achieves
the planets of Vaikuntha and Krsnaloka without a doubt. It is very easy
to understand through this important verse that if by simply worshiping
the demigods one can achieve the heavenly planets, or by worshiping the
Pitas achieve the Pita planets, or by practicing the black arts achieve
the ghostly planets, why can the pure devotee not achieve the planet of
Krsna or Visnu? Unfortunately many people have no information of these
sublime planets where Krsna and Visnu live, and because they do not
know of them they fall down. Even the impersonalists fall down from the
brahmajyoti. This Krsna consciousness movement is therefore
distributing sublime information to the entire human society to the
effect that simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra one can become
perfect in this life and go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 26
patram puspam phalam toyam
yo me bhaktya prayacchati
tad aham bhakty-upahrtam
asnami prayatatmanah
SYNONYMS
patram--a leaf; puspam--a flower; phalam--a fruit; toyam--water; yah--
whoever; me--unto Me; bhaktya--with devotion; prayacchati--offers; tat-
-that; aham--I; bhakti-upahrtam--offered in devotion; asnami--accept;
prayata-atmanah--of one in pure consciousness.
TRANSLATION
If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or
water, I will accept it.
PURPORT
Here Lord Krsna, having established that He is the only enjoyer, the
primeval Lord, and the real object of all sacrificial offerings,
reveals what types of sacrifices He desires to be offered. If one
wishes to engage in devotional service to the Supreme in order to be
purified and reach the goal of life--the transcendental loving service
of God--then he should find out what the Lord desires of him. One who
loves Krsna will give Him whatever He wants, and he avoids offering
anything which is undesirable or unasked for. Thus meat, fish and eggs
should not be offered to Krsna. If He desired such things as offerings,
He would have said so. Instead He clearly requests that a leaf, a
fruit, flowers and water be given to Him, and He says of this offering,
"I will accept it." Therefore, we should understand that He will not
accept meat, fish and eggs. Vegetables, grains, fruits, milk and water
are the proper foods for human beings and are prescribed by Lord Krsna
Himself. Whatever else we eat cannot be offered to Him, since He will
not accept it. Thus we cannot be acting on the level of loving devotion
if we offer such foods.
In the Third Chapter, verse thirteen, Sri Krsna explains that only the
remains of sacrifice are purified and fit for consumption by those who
are seeking advancement in life and release from the clutches of the
material entanglement. Those who do not make an offering of their food,
He says in the same verse, are said to be eating only sin. In other
words, their every mouthful is simply deepening their involvement in
the complexities of material nature. But preparing nice, simple
vegetable dishes, offering them before the picture or Deity of Lord
Krsna and bowing down and praying for Him to accept such a humble
offering, enables one to advance steadily in life, to purify the body,
and to create fine brain tissues which will lead to clear thinking.
Above all, the offering should be made with an attitude of love. Krsna
has no need of food, since He already possesses everything that be, yet
He will accept the offering of one who desires to please Him in that
way. The important element, in preparation, in serving and in offering,
is to act with love for Krsna.
The impersonalist philosophers, who wish to maintain that the Absolute
Truth is without senses, cannot comprehend this verse of Bhagavad-gita.
To them, it is either a metaphor or proof of the mundane character of
Krsna, the speaker of the Gita. But, in actuality, Krsna, the Supreme
Godhead, has senses, and it is stated that His senses are
interchangeable; in other words, one sense can perform the function of
any other. This is what it means to say that Krsna is absolute. Lacking
senses, He could hardly be considered full in all opulences. In the
Seventh Chapter, Krsna has explained that He impregnates the living
entities into material nature. This is done by His looking upon
material nature. And so in this instance, Krsna's hearing the devotee's
words of love in offering foodstuffs is wholly identical with His
eating and actually tasting. This point should be emphasized: because
of His absolute position, His hearing is wholly identical with His
eating and tasting. Only the devotee, who accepts Krsna as He describes
Himself, without interpretation, can understand that the Supreme
Absolute Truth can eat food and enjoy it.
TEXT 27
yat karosi yad asnasi
yaj juhosi dadasi yat
yat tapasyasi kaunteya
tat kurusva mad-arpanam
SYNONYMS
yat--whatever; karosi--you do; yat--whatever; asnasi--you eat; yat--
whatever; juhosi--you offer; dadasi--you give away; yat--whatever; yat-
-whatever; tapasyasi--austerities you perform; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; tat--that; kurusva--make; mat--unto Me; arpanam--offering.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer
and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should
be done as an offering unto Me.
PURPORT
Thus, it is the duty of everyone to mold his life in such a way that he
will not forget Krsna in any circumstance. Everyone has to work for
maintenance of his body and soul together, and Krsna recommends herein
that one should work for Him. Everyone has to eat something to live;
therefore he should accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna.
Any civilized man has to perform some religious ritualistic ceremonies;
therefore Krsna recommends, "Do it for Me," and this is called arcana.
Everyone has a tendency to give something in charity; Krsna says, "Give
it to Me," and this means that all surplus money accumulated should be
utilized in furthering the Krsna consciousness movement. Nowadays
people are very much inclined to the meditational process, which is not
practical in this age, but if anyone practices meditating on Krsna
twenty-four hours by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra round his beads, he
is surely the greatest yogi. as substantiated by the Sixth Chapter of
Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 28
subhasubha-phalair evam
moksyase karma-bandhanaih
sannyasa-yoga-yuktatma
vimukto mam upaisyasi
SYNONYMS
subha--good; asubha--evil; phalaih--results; evam--thus; moksyase--
free; karma--action; bandhanaih--bondage; sannyasa--of renunciation;
yoga--the yoga; yukta-atma--having the mind firmly set on; vimuktah--
liberated; mam--to Me; upaisyasi--you will attain.
TRANSLATION
In this way you will be freed from all reactions to good and evil
deeds, and by this principle of renunciation you will be liberated and
come to Me.
PURPORT
One who acts in Krsna consciousness under superior direction is called
yukta. The technical term is yukta-vairagya. This is further explained
by Rupa Gosvami as follows:
anasaktasya visayan
yatharham upayunjatah
nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe
yuktam vairagyam ucyate
(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 2.255)
Rupa Gosvami says that as long as we are in this material world we have
to act; we cannot cease acting. Therefore if actions are performed and
the fruits are given to Krsna, then that is called yukta-vairagya.
Actually situated in renunciation, such activities clear the mirror of
the mind, and as the actor gradually makes progress in spiritual
realization he becomes completely surrendered to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore at the end he becomes liberated, and
this liberation is also specified. By this liberation he does not
become one with the brahmajyoti, but rather enters into the planet of
the Supreme Lord. It is clearly mentioned here: mam upaisyasi, "he
comes to Me," back home, back to Godhead. There are five different
stages of liberation, and here it is specified that the devotee who has
always lived his lifetime here under the direction of the Supreme Lord,
as stated, has evolved to the point where he can after quitting this
body, go back to Godhead and engage directly in the association of the
Supreme Lord.
Anyone who has no other interest but to dedicate his life to the
service of the Lord is actually a sannyasi. Such a person always thinks
of himself as an eternal servant, dependent on the supreme will of the
Lord. As such, whatever he does, he does it for the benefit of the
Lord. Whatever action he performs, he performs it as service to the
Lord. He does not give serious attention to the fruitive activities or
prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas. For ordinary persons it is
obligatory to execute the prescribed duties mentioned in the Vedas, but
although a pure devotee who is completely engaged in the service of the
Lord may sometimes appear to go against the prescribed Vedic duties,
actually it is not so.
It is said, therefore, by Vaisnava authorities that even the most
intelligent person cannot understand the plans and activities of a pure
devotee. The exact words are tanra vakya, kriya, mudra vijneha na
bujhaya (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 23.39). A person who is thus
always engaged in the service of the Lord or is always thinking and
planning how to serve the Lord is to be considered completely liberated
at present and in the future. His going back home, back to Godhead, is
guaranteed. He is above all materialistic criticism, just as Krsna is
above all criticism.
TEXT 29
samo 'ham sarva-bhutesu
na me dvesyo 'sti na priyah
ye bhajanti tu mam bhaktya
mayi te tesu capy aham
SYNONYMS
samah--equally disposed; aham--I; sarva-bhutesu--to all living
entities; na--no one; me--Mine; dvesyah--hateful; asti--is; na--nor;
priyah--dear; ye--those; bhajanti--render transcendental service; tu--
yet; mam--unto Me; bhaktya--in devotion; mayi--unto Me; te--such
persons; tesu--in them; ca--also; api--certainly; aham--I.
TRANSLATION
I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and
I am also a friend to him.
PURPORT
One may question here that if Krsna is equal to everyone and no one is
His special friend, then why does He take a special interest in the
devotees who are always engaged in His transcendental service? But this
is not discrimination; it is natural. Any man in this material world
may be very charitably disposed, yet he has a special interest in his
own children. The Lord claims that every living entity--in whatever
form is His son, and as such He provides everyone with a generous
supply of the necessities of life. He is just like a cloud which pours
rain all over, regardless of whether it falls on rock or land or water.
But for His devotees, He gives specific attention. Such devotees are
mentioned here: they are always in Krsna consciousness, and therefore
they are always transcendentally situated in Krsna. The very phrase
"Krsna consciousness" suggests that those who are in such consciousness
are living transcendentalists, situated in Him. The Lord says here
distinctly, mayi te, "in Me." Naturally, as a result, the Lord is also
in them. This is reciprocal. This also explains the words ye yatha mam
prapadyante tams tathaiva bhajamy aham: "Whoever surrenders unto Me,
proportionately I take care of him." This transcendental reciprocation
exists because both the Lord and the devotee are conscious. When a
diamond is set in a golden ring, it looks very nice. The gold is
glorified, and at the same time the diamond is glorified. The Lord and
the living entity eternally glitter, and when a living entity becomes
inclined to the service of the Supreme Lord he looks like gold. The
Lord is a diamond, and so this combination is very nice. Living
entities in a pure state are called devotees. The Supreme Lord becomes
the devotee of His devotees. If a reciprocal relationship is not
present between the devotee and the Lord, then there is no personalist
philosophy. In the impersonal philosophy there is no reciprocation
between the Supreme and the living entity, but in the personalist
philosophy there is.
The example is often given that the Lord is like a desire tree, and
whatever one wants from this desire tree, the Lord supplies. But here
the explanation is more complete. The Lord is here stated to be partial
to the devotees. This is the manifestation of the Lord's special mercy
to the devotees. The Lord's reciprocation should not be considered to
be under the law of karma. It belongs to the transcendental situation
in which the Lord and His devotees function. Devotional service of the
Lord is not an activity of this material world; it is part of the
spiritual world, where eternity, bliss and knowledge predominate.
TEXT 30
api cet su-duracaro
bhajate mam ananya-bhak
sadhur eva sa mantavyah
samyag vyavasito hi sah
SYNONYMS
api--in spite of; cet--although; su-duracarah--one committing the most
abominable actions; bhajate--engaged in devotional service; mam--unto
Me; ananya-bhak--without deviation; sadhuh--saint; eva--certainly; sah-
-he; mantavyah--to be considered; samyak--completely; vyavasitah--
situated; hi--certainly; sah--he.
TRANSLATION
Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is
properly situated.
PURPORT
The word su-duracarah used in this verse is very significant, and we
should understand it properly. When a living entity is conditioned, he
has two kinds of activities: one is conditional, and the other is
constitutional. As for protecting the body or abiding by the rules of
society and state, certainly there are different activities, even for
the devotees, in connection with the conditional life, and such
activities are called conditional. Besides these, the living entity who
is fully conscious of his spiritual nature and is engaged in Krsna
consciousness, or the devotional service of the Lord, has activities
which are called transcendental. Such activities are performed in his
constitutional position, and they are technically called devotional
service. Now, in the conditioned state, sometimes devotional service
and the conditional service in relation to the body will parallel one
another. But then again, sometimes these activities become opposed to
one another. As far as possible, a devotee is very cautious so that he
does not do anything that could disrupt his wholesome condition. He
knows that perfection in his activities depends on his progressive
realization of Krsna consciousness. Sometimes, however, it may be seen
that a person in Krsna consciousness commits some act which may be
taken as most abominable socially or politically. But such a temporary
falldown does not disqualify him. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated
that if a person falls down but is wholeheartedly engaged in the
transcendental service of the Supreme Lord, the Lord, being situated
within his heart, beautifies him and excuses him from that abomination.
The material contamination is so strong that even a yogi fully engaged
in the service of the Lord sometimes becomes ensnared; but Krsna
consciousness is so strong that such an occasional falldown is at once
rectified. Therefore the process of devotional service is always a
success. No one should deride a devotee for some accidental falldown
from the ideal path, for, as is explained in the next verse, such
occasional falldowns will be stopped in due course, as soon as a
devotee is completely situated in Krsna consciousness.
Therefore a person who is situated in Krsna consciousness and is
engaged with determination in the process of chanting Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare should be considered to be in the transcendental position, even if
by chance or accident he is found to have fallen. The words sadhur eva,
"he is saintly," are very emphatic. They are a warning to the
nondevotees that because of an accidental falldown a devotee should not
be derided; he should still be considered saintly even if he has fallen
down accidentally. And the word mantavyah is still more emphatic. If
one does not follow this rule, and derides a devotee for his accidental
falldown, then he is disobeying the order of the Supreme Lord. The only
qualification of a devotee is to be unflinchingly and exclusively
engaged in devotional service.
The mark of a spot which may be seen on the moon does not become an
impediment to the moonlight. Similarly, the accidental falldown of a
devotee from the path of a saintly character does not make him
abominable. On the other hand, one should not misunderstand that a
devotee in transcendental devotional service can act in all kinds of
abominable ways; this verse only refers to an accident due to the
strong power of material connections. Devotional service is more or
less a declaration of war against the illusory energy. As long as one
is not strong enough to fight the illusory energy, there may be
accidental falldowns. But when one is strong enough, he is no longer
subjected to such falldowns, as previously explained. No one should
take advantage of this verse and commit nonsense and think that he is
still a devotee. If he does not improve in his character by devotional
service, then it is to be understood that he is not a high devotee.
TEXT 31
ksipram bhavati dharmatma
sasvac-chantim nigacchati
kaunteya pratijanihi
na me bhaktah pranasyati
SYNONYMS
ksipram--very soon; bhavati--becomes; dharma-atma--righteous; sasvat-
santim--lasting peace; nigacchati--attains; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
pratijanihi--justly declare; na--never; me--Mine; bhaktah--devotees;
pranasyati--perishes.
TRANSLATION
He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kunti,
declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.
PURPORT
This should not be misunderstood. In the Seventh Chapter the Lord says
that one who is engaged in mischievous activities cannot become a
devotee of the Lord. One who is not a devotee of the Lord has no good
qualifications whatsoever. The question remains, then, How can a person
engaged in abominable activities--either by accident or intention--be a
pure devotee? This question may justly be raised. The miscreants, as
stated in the Seventh Chapter, who never come to the devotional service
of the Lord, have no good qualifications, as is stated in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Generally, a devotee who is engaged in the nine kinds of
devotional activities is engaged in the process of cleansing all
material contamination from the heart. He puts the Supreme Personality
of Godhead within his heart, and all sinful contaminations are
naturally washed away. Continuous thinking of the Supreme Lord makes
him pure by nature. According to the Vedas, there is a certain
regulation that if one falls down from his exalted position, he has to
undergo certain ritualistic processes to purify himself. But here there
is no such condition because the purifying process is already there in
the heart of the devotee, due to his remembering the Supreme
Personality of Godhead constantly. Therefore, the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare should be continued without stoppage. This will protect
a devotee from all accidental falldowns. He will thus remain
perpetually free from all material contaminations.
TEXT 32
mam hi partha vyapasritya
ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah
striyo vaisyas tatha sudras
te 'pi yanti param gatim
SYNONYMS
mam--unto Me; hi--certainly; partha--O son of Prtha; vyapasritya--
particularly taking shelter; ye--anyone; api--also; syuh--becomes;
papa-yonayah--born of a lower family; striyah--women; vaisyah--
mercantile people; tatha--also; sudrah--lower-class men; te api--even
they; yanti--go; param--supreme; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prtha, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower
birth--women, vaisyas [merchants], as well as sudras [workers]--can
approach the supreme destination.
PURPORT
It is clearly declared here by the Supreme Lord that in devotional
service there is no distinction between the lower or higher classes of
people. In the material conception of life, there are such divisions,
but for a person engaged in transcendental devotional service to the
Lord, there are not. Everyone is eligible for the supreme destination.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.4.18) it is stated that even the lowest,
who are called candalas (dog-eaters), can be elevated by association
with a pure devotee. Therefore devotional service and guidance of a
pure devotee are so strong that there is no discrimination between the
lower and higher classes of men; anyone can take to it. The most simple
man taking shelter of the pure devotee can be purified by proper
guidance. According to the different modes of material nature, men are
classified in the mode of goodness (brahmanas), the mode of passion
(ksatriyas, or administrators), the mixed modes of passion and
ignorance (vaisyas, or merchants), and the mode of ignorance (sudras,
or workers). Those lower than them are called candalas, and they are
born in sinful families. Generally, those who are born in sinful
families are not accepted by the higher classes. But the process of
devotional service and the pure devotee of the Supreme God are so
strong that all the lower classes can attain the highest perfection of
life. This is possible only when one takes shelter of Krsna. One has to
take shelter completely of Krsna. Then one can become much greater than
great jnanis and yogis.
TEXT 33
kim punar brahmanah punya
bhakta rajarsayas tatha
anityam asukham lokam
imam prapya bhajasva mam
SYNONYMS
kim--how much; punah--again; brahmanah--brahmanas; punyah--righteous;
bhaktah--devotees; raja-rsayah--saintly kings; tatha--also; anityam--
temporary; asukham--sorrowful; lokam--planet; imam--this; prapya--
gaining; bhajasva--are engaged in loving service; mam--unto Me.
TRANSLATION
How much greater then are the brahmanas, the righteous, the devotees
and saintly kings who in this temporary miserable world engage in
loving service unto Me.
PURPORT
In this material world there are classifications of people, but, after
all, this world is not a happy place for anyone. It is clearly stated
here, anityam asukham lokam: this world is temporary and full of
miseries, not habitable for any sane gentleman. This world is declared
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be temporary and full of
miseries. Some of the philosophers, especially the minor philosophers,
say that this world is false, but we can understand from Bhagavad-gita
that the world is not false; it is temporary. There is a difference
between temporary and false. This world is temporary, but there is
another world, which is eternal. This world is miserable, but the other
world is eternal and blissful.
Arjuna was born in a saintly royal family. To him also the Lord says,
"Take to My devotional service and come quickly back to Godhead, back
home." No one should remain in this temporary world, full as it is with
miseries. Everyone should attach himself to the bosom of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead so that he can be eternally happy. The
devotional service of the Supreme Lord is the only process by which all
problems of all classes of men can be solved. Everyone should therefore
take to Krsna consciousness and make his life perfect.
TEXT 34
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi yuktvaivam
atmanam mat-parayanah
SYNONYMS
mat-manah--always thinking of Me; bhava--become; mat--My; bhaktah--
devotee; mat--My; yaji--worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offer
obeisances; mam--unto Me; eva--completely; esyasi--come; yuktva evam--
being absorbed; atmanam--your soul; mat-parayanah--devoted to Me.
TRANSLATION
Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, offer obeisances and worship
Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly indicated that Krsna consciousness is the
only means of being delivered from the clutches of this contaminated
material world. Sometimes unscrupulous commentators distort the meaning
of what is clearly stated here: that all devotional service should be
offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Unfortunately,
unscrupulous commentators divert the mind of the reader to that which
is not at all feasible. Such commentators do not know that there is no
difference between Krsna's mind and Krsna. Krsna is not an ordinary
human being; He is Absolute Truth. His body, mind and He Himself are
one and absolute. It is stated in the Kurma Purana, as it is quoted by
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami in his Anubhasya comments on the
Caitanya-caritamrta (Fifth Chapter, Adi-lila, verses 41-48), deha-dehi-
vibhedo 'yam nesvare vidyate kvacit. This means that there is no
difference in Krsna, the Supreme Lord, between Himself and His body.
But, because they do not know this science of Krsna, the commentators
hide Krsna and divide His personality from His mind or from His body.
Although this is sheer ignorance of the science of Krsna, some men make
profit out of misleading the people.
There are some who are demonic; they also think of Krsna, but
enviously, just like King Kamsa, Krsna's uncle. He was also thinking of
Krsna always, but he thought of Krsna as his enemy. He was always in
anxiety, wondering when Krsna would come to kill him. That kind of
thinking will not help us. One should be thinking of Krsna in
devotional love. That is bhakti. One should cultivate the knowledge of
Krsna continually. What is that favorable cultivation? It is to learn
from a bona fide teacher. Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and we have several times explained that His body is not material, but
is eternal, blissful knowledge. This kind of talk about Krsna will help
one become a devotee. Otherwise, understanding Krsna from the wrong
source will prove fruitless.
One should therefore engage his mind in the eternal form, the primal
form of Krsna; with conviction in his heart that Krsna is the Supreme,
he should engage himself in worship. There are hundreds of thousands of
temples in India for the worship of Krsna, and devotional service is
practiced there. When such practice is made, one has to offer
obeisances to Krsna. One should lower his head before the Deity and
engage his mind, his body, his activities--everything. That will make
one fully absorbed in Krsna without deviation. This will help one
transfer into the Krsnaloka. One should not be deviated by unscrupulous
commentators. One must engage in the nine different processes of
devotional service, beginning with hearing and chanting about Krsna.
Pure devotional service is the highest achievement of human society.
In the Seventh and Eighth chapters of Bhagavad-gita, pure devotional
service to the Lord has been explained, apart from the yoga of
knowledge and mystic yoga or fruitive activities. Those who are not
purely sanctified may be attracted by different features of the Lord,
like the impersonal brahmajyoti and localized Paramatma, but a pure
devotee directly takes to the service of the Supreme Lord.
There is a beautiful poem about Krsna in which it is clearly stated
that any person who is engaged in the worship of demigods is most
unintelligent and cannot achieve at any time the supreme award of
Krsna. The devotee, in the beginning, may sometimes fall from the
standard, but still he should be considered superior to all other
philosophers and yogis. One who always engages in Krsna consciousness
should be understood to be the perfect saintly person. His accidental
nondevotional activities will diminish, and he will soon be situated
without any doubt in complete perfection. The pure devotee has no
actual chance to fall down because the Supreme Godhead personally takes
care of His pure devotees. Therefore, the intelligent person should
take directly to this process of Krsna consciousness and happily live
in this material world. He will eventually receive the supreme award of
Krsna.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Ninth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Most Confidential Knowledge.
Bhagavad-gita As It Is by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the fair use guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this
electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,
research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You can
distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more
than ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express
written permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts
in the following way: Excerpted from Bhagavad-gita As It Is by A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, www.Krishna.com.
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.