Chapter 8
Attaining the Supreme
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
kim tad brahma kim adhyatmam
kim karma purusottama
adhibhutam ca kim proktam
adhidaivam kim ucyate
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kim--what; tat--that; brahma--Brahman; kim-
-what; adhyatmam--the self; kim--what; karma--fruitive activities;
purusa-uttama--O 
Supreme 
Person; 
adhibhutam--the 
material
manifestation; ca--and; kim--what; proktam--is called; adhidaivam--the
demigods; kim--what; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is
the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this material
manifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.
PURPORT
In this chapter Lord Krsna answers these different questions from
Arjuna beginning with, "What is Brahman?" The Lord also explains karma,
fruitive activities, devotional service and yoga principles, and
devotional service in its pure form. The Srimad-Bhagavatam explains
that the Supreme Absolute Truth is known as Brahman, Paramatma, and
Bhagavan. In addition, the living entity, individual soul, is also
called Brahman. Arjuna also inquires about atma, which refers to body,
soul and mind. According to the Vedic dictionary, atma refers to the
mind, soul, body and senses also.
Arjuna has addressed the Supreme Lord as Purusottama, Supreme Person,
which means that he was putting these questions not simply to a friend
but to the Supreme Person, knowing Him to be the supreme authority able
to give definitive answers.
TEXT 2
adhiyajnah katham ko 'tra
dehe 'smin madhusudana
prayana-kale ca katham
jneyo 'si niyatatmabhih
SYNONYMS
adhiyajnah--the Lord of sacrifice; katham--how; kah--who; atra--here;
dehe--in the body; asmin--in this; madhusudana--O Madhusudana; prayana-
kale--at the time of death; ca--and; katham--how; jneyah--be known;
asi--You can; niyata-atmabhih--by the self-controlled.
TRANSLATION
How does this Lord of sacrifice live in the body, and in which part
does He live, O Madhusudana? And how can those engaged in devotional
service know You at the time of death?
PURPORT
"Lord of sacrifice" may refer to either Indra or Visnu. Visnu is the
chief of the primal demigods, including Brahma and Siva, and Indra is
the chief of the administrative demigods. Both Indra and Visnu are
worshiped by yajna performances. But here Arjuna asks who is actually
the Lord of yajna (sacrifice) and how is the Lord residing within the
body of the living entity.
Arjuna addresses the Lord as Madhusudana because Krsna once killed a
demon named Madhu. Actually these questions, which are of the nature of
doubts, should not have arisen in the mind of Arjuna because Arjuna is
a Krsna conscious devotee. Therefore these doubts are like demons.
Since Krsna is so expert in killing demons, Arjuna here addresses Him
as Madhusudana so that Krsna might kill the demonic doubts that arise
in Arjuna's mind.
Now the word prayana-kale in this verse is very significant because
whatever we do in life will be tested at the time of death. Arjuna
fears that at the time of death, those who are in Krsna consciousness
will forget the Supreme Lord because at such a time body functions are
disrupted and the mind may be in a panic-stricken state. Therefore
Maharaja Kulasekhara, a great devotee, prays, "My dear Lord, may I die
immediately now that I am healthy so that the swan of my mind may enter
into the stem of Thy lotus feet." This metaphor is used because the
swan often takes pleasure in entering the stem of the lotus flower--
similarly, the mind of the pure devotee is drawn to the lotus feet of
the Lord.  Maharaja Kulasekhara fears that at the moment of death his
throat will be so choked up that he will not be able to chant the holy
names, so it is better to "die immediately." Arjuna questions how one's
mind can remain fixed on Krsna's lotus feet at such times.
TEXT 3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
aksaram brahma paramam
svabhavo 'dhyatmam ucyate
bhuta-bhavodbhava-karo
visargah karma-samjnitah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aksaram--
indestructible; brahma--Brahman; paramam--transcendental; svabhavah--
eternal nature; adhyatmam--the self; ucyate--is called; bhuta-bhava-
udbhava-karah--action producing the material bodies of the living
entities; visargah--creation; karma--fruitive activities; samjnitah--is
called.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said: The indestructible, transcendental living entity
is called Brahman and his eternal nature is called the self. Action
pertaining to the development of these material bodies is called karma,
or fruitive activities.
PURPORT
Brahman is indestructible and eternally existing, and its constitution
is not changed at any time. Beyond Brahman there is Parabrahman.
Brahman refers to the living entity, and Parabrahman refers to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The constitutional position of the
living entity is different from the position he takes in the material
world. In material consciousness, his nature is to try to be the lord
of matter, but in spiritual (Krsna) consciousness, his position is to
serve the Supreme. When the living entity is in material consciousness,
he has to take on various bodies in the material world. That is called
karma, or varied creation by the force of material consciousness.
In Vedic literature the living entity is called jivatma and Brahman,
but he is never called Parabrahman. The living entity (jivatma) takes
different positions--sometimes he merges into the dark material nature
and identifies himself with matter, and sometimes he identifies himself
with the superior spiritual nature. Therefore he is called the Supreme
Lord's marginal energy. According to his identification with material
or spiritual nature, he receives a material or spiritual body. In
material nature he may take a body from any of the 8,400,000 species of
life, but in spiritual nature he has only one body. In material nature
he is sometimes manifested as a man, demigod, animal, beast, bird,
etc., according to his karma. To attain material heavenly planets and
enjoy their facilities, he sometimes performs sacrifices (yajna), but
when his merit is exhausted, he returns to earth again in the form of a
man.
In the process of sacrifice, the living entity makes specific
sacrifices to attain specific heavenly planets and consequently reaches
them. When the merit of sacrifice is exhausted, then the living entity
descends to earth in the form of rain, then takes on the form of
grains, and the grains are eaten by man and transformed into semen,
which impregnates a woman, and thus the living entity once again
attains the human form to perform sacrifice and so repeat the same
cycle. In this way, the living entity perpetually comes and goes on the
material path. The Krsna conscious person, however, avoids such
sacrifices. He takes directly to Krsna consciousness and thereby
prepares himself to return to Godhead.
Impersonalist commentators on the Gita unreasonably assume that Brahman
takes the form of jiva in the material world, and to substantiate this
they refer to Chapter Fifteen, verse 7, of the Gita. But this verse
also speaks of the living entity as "an eternal fragment of Myself."
The fragment of God, the living entity, may fall down into the material
world, but the Supreme Lord (Acyuta) never falls down. Therefore this
assumption that the Supreme Brahman assumes the form of jiva is not
acceptable. It is important to remember that in Vedic literature
Brahman (the living entity) is distinguished from Parabrahman (the
Supreme Lord).
TEXT 4
adhibhutam ksaro bhavah
purusas cadhidaivatam
adhiyajno 'ham evatra
dehe deha-bhrtam vara
SYNONYMS
adhibhutam--the physical manifestation; ksarah--constantly changing;
bhavah--nature; purusah--the universal form; ca--and; adhidaivatam--
including all demigods like the sun and moon; adhiyajnah--the
Supersoul; aham--I (Krsna); eva--certainly; atra--in this; dehe--body;
deha-bhrtam--of the embodied; vara--the Supreme.
TRANSLATION
Physical nature is known to be endlessly mutable. The universe is the
cosmic form of the Supreme Lord, and I am that Lord represented as the
Supersoul, dwelling in the heart of every embodied being.
PURPORT
The physical nature is constantly changing. Material bodies generally
pass through six stages: they are born, they grow, they remain for some
duration, they produce some by-products, they dwindle, and then they
vanish. This physical nature is called adhibhuta. Because it is created
at a certain point and will be annihilated at a certain point, the
conception of the universal form of the Supreme Lord that includes all
demigods and their different planets is called adhidaivata. The
individual soul (jiva) accompanies the body. The Supersoul, a plenary
representation of Lord Krsna, is called the Paramatma or adhiyajna and
is situated in the heart. The word eva is particularly important in the
context of this verse because by this word the Lord stresses that the
Paramatma is not different from Him. The Supersoul, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, seated beside the individual soul, is the
witness of the individual soul's activities and is the source of
consciousness. The Supersoul gives the jiva an opportunity to act
freely, and He witnesses his activities. The functions of all these
different manifestations of the Supreme Lord automatically become
clarified for the pure Krsna conscious devotee engaged in
transcendental service of the Lord. The gigantic universal form of the
Lord called adhidaivata is contemplated by the neophyte who cannot
approach the Supreme Lord in His manifestation as Supersoul. The
neophyte is advised to contemplate the universal form whose legs are
considered the lower planets and whose eyes are considered the sun and
moon, and whose head is considered the upper planetary system.
TEXT 5
anta-kale ca mam eva
smaran muktva kalevaram
yah prayati sa mad-bhavam
yati nasty atra samsayah
SYNONYMS
anta-kale--at the end of life; ca--also; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly;
smaran--remembering; muktva--quitting; kalevaram--the body; yah--he
who; prayati--goes; sah--he; mat-bhavam--My nature; yati--achieves; na-
-not; asti--there is; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATION
And whoever, at the time of death, quits his body, remembering Me
alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.
PURPORT
In this verse the importance of Krsna consciousness is stressed. Anyone
who quits his body in Krsna consciousness is at once transferred to the
transcendental abode of the Supreme Lord. The word smaran
("remembering") is important. Remembrance of Krsna is not possible for
the impure soul who has not practiced Krsna consciousness in devotional
service. To remember Krsna one should chant the maha-mantra, Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare, incessantly, following in the footsteps of Lord
Caitanya, being more tolerant than a tree, humbler than the grass and
offering all respect to others without requiring respect in return. In
such a way one will be able to depart from the body successfully
remembering Krsna and so attain the supreme goal.
TEXT 6
yam yam vapi smaran bhavam
tyajaty ante kalevaram
tam tam evaiti kaunteya
sada tad-bhava-bhavitah
SYNONYMS
yam yam--whatever; va--either; api--also; smaran--remembering; bhavam--
nature; tyajati--give up; ante--at the end; kalevaram--this body; tam
tam--similar; eva--certainly; eti--gets; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
sada--always; tat--that; bhava--state of being; bhavitah--remembering.
TRANSLATION
Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that
state he will attain without fail.
PURPORT
The process of changing one's nature at the critical moment of death is
here explained. How can one die in the proper state of mind? Maharaja
Bharata thought of a deer at the time of death and so was transferred
to that form of life. However, as a deer, Maharaja Bharata could
remember his past activities. Of course the cumulative effect of the
thoughts and actions of one's life influences one's thoughts at the
moment of death; therefore the actions of this life determine one's
future state of being. If one is transcendentally absorbed in Krsna's
service, then his next body will be transcendental (spiritual), not
physical. Therefore the chanting of Hare Krsna is the best process for
successfully changing one's state of being to transcendental life.
TEXT 7
tasmat sarvesu kalesu
mam anusmara yudhya ca
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
mam evaisyasy asamsayah
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; sarvesu--always; kalesu--time; mam--unto Me;
anusmara--go on remembering; yudhya--fight; ca--also; mayi--unto Me;
arpita--surrender; manah--mind; buddhih--intellect; mam--unto Me; eva--
surely; esyasi--will attain; asamsayah--beyond a doubt.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Krsna
and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With
your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on
Me, you will attain Me without doubt.
PURPORT
This instruction to Arjuna is very important for all men engaged in
material activities. The Lord does not say that one should give up his
prescribed duties or engagements. One can continue them and at the same
time think of Krsna by chanting Hare Krsna. This will free one from
material contamination and engage the mind and intelligence in Krsna.
By chanting Krsna's names, one will be transferred to the supreme
planet, Krsnaloka, without a doubt.
TEXT 8
abhyasa-yoga-yuktena
cetasa nanya-gamina
paramam purusam divyam
yati parthanucintayan
SYNONYMS
abhyasa--practice; yoga-yuktena--being engaged in meditation; cetasa--
by the mind and intelligence; na anya-gamina--without their being
deviated; paramam--the Supreme; purusam--Personality of Godhead;
divyam--transcendental; yati--achieves; partha--O son of Prtha;
anucintayan--constantly thinking of.
TRANSLATION
He who meditates on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind
constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, O
Partha [Arjuna], is sure to reach Me.
PURPORT
In this verse Lord Krsna stresses the importance of remembering Him.
One's memory of Krsna is revived by chanting the maha-mantra, Hare
Krsna. By this practice of chanting and hearing the sound vibration of
the Supreme Lord, one's ear, tongue and mind are engaged. This mystic
meditation is very easy to practice, and it helps one attain the
Supreme Lord. Purusam means enjoyer. Although living entities belong to
the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, they are in material
contamination. They think themselves enjoyers, but they are not the
supreme enjoyer. Here it is clearly stated that the supreme enjoyer is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different manifestations and
plenary expansions as Narayana, Vasudeva, etc.
The devotees can constantly think of the object of worship, the Supreme
Lord, in any of His features--Narayana, Krsna, Rama, etc., by chanting
Hare Krsna. This practice will purify him, and at the end of his life,
due to his constant chanting, he will be transferred to the kingdom of
God. Yoga practice is meditation on the Supersoul within; similarly, by
chanting Hare Krsna one fixes his mind always on the Supreme Lord. The
mind is fickle, and therefore it is necessary to engage the mind by
force to think of Krsna. One example often given is that of the
caterpillar that thinks of becoming a butterfly and so is transformed
into a butterfly in the same life. Similarly, if we constantly think of
Krsna, it is certain that at the end of our lives we shall have the
same bodily constitution as Krsna.
TEXT 9
kavim puranam anusasitaram
anor aniyamsam anusmared yah
sarvasya dhataram acintya-rupam
aditya-varnam tamasah parastat
SYNONYMS
kavim--one who knows everything; puranam--the oldest; anusasitaram--the
controller; anoh--of the atom; aniyamsam--smaller than; anusmaret--
always thinking; yah--one who; sarvasya--of everything; dhataram--the
maintainer; acintya--inconceivable; rupam--form; aditya-varnam--
illuminated like the sun; tamasah--of the darkness; parastat--
transcendental.
TRANSLATION
One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows
everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who is
smaller than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who is
beyond all material conception, who is inconceivable, and who is always
a person. He is luminous like the sun and, being transcendental, is
beyond this material nature.
PURPORT
The process of thinking of the Supreme is mentioned in this verse. The
foremost point is that He is not impersonal or void. One cannot
meditate on something impersonal or void. That is very difficult. The
process of thinking of Krsna, however, is very easy and is factually
stated herein. First of all, He is purusa, spiritual, Rama and Krsna,
and is described herein as kavim; that is, He knows past, present and
future and therefore knows everything. He is the oldest personality
because He is the origin of everything; everything is born out of Him.
He is also the supreme controller of the universe, maintainer and
instructor of humanity. He is smaller than the smallest. The living
entity is one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair, but the Lord is
so inconceivably small that He enters into the heart of this particle.
Therefore He is called smaller than the smallest. As the Supreme, He
can enter into the atom and into the heart of the smallest and control
him as the Supersoul. Although so small, He is still all-pervading and
is maintaining everything. By Him all these planetary systems are
sustained. We often wonder how these big planets are floating in the
air. It is stated here that the Supreme Lord, by His inconceivable
energy, is sustaining all these big planets and systems of galaxies.
The word acintya (inconceivable) is very significant in this
connection. God's energy is beyond our conception, beyond our thinking
jurisdiction, and is therefore called inconceivable (acintya). Who can
argue this point? He pervades this material world and yet is beyond it.
We cannot even comprehend this material world, which is insignificant
compared to the spiritual world--so how can we comprehend what is
beyond? Acintya means that which is beyond this material world, that
which our argument, logic and philosophical speculation cannot touch,
that which is inconceivable. Therefore intelligent persons, avoiding
useless argument and speculation, should accept what is stated in
scriptures like the Vedas, Gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam and follow the
principles they set down. This will lead one to understanding.
TEXT 10
prayana-kale manasacalena
bhaktya yukto yoga-balena caiva
bhruvor madhye pranam avesya samyak
sa tam param purusam upaiti divyam
SYNONYMS
prayana-kale--at the time of death; manasa--by the mind; acalena--
without being deviated; bhaktya--in full devotion; yuktah--engaged;
yoga-balena--by the power of mystic yoga; ca--also; eva--certainly;
bhruvoh--between the two eyebrows; madhye--in; pranam--the life air;
avesya--establishing; samyak--completely; sah--he; tam--that; param--
transcendental; purusam--Personality of Godhead; upaiti--achieves;
divyam--in the spiritual kingdom.
TRANSLATION
One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows
and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord,
will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly stated that at the time of death the mind
must be fixed in devotion on the Supreme Godhead. For those practiced
in yoga, it is recommended that they raise the life force between the
eyebrows, but for a pure devotee who does not practice such yoga, the
mind should always be engaged in Krsna consciousness so that at death
he can remember the Supreme by His grace. This is explained in verse
fourteen.
The particular use of the word yoga-balena is significant in this verse
because without practice of yoga one cannot come to this transcendental
state of being at the time of death. One cannot suddenly remember the
Supreme Lord at death unless he is practiced in some yoga system,
especially the system of bhakti-yoga. Since one's mind at death is very
disturbed, one should practice transcendence through yoga during one's
life.
TEXT 11
yad aksaram veda-vido vadanti
visanti yad yatayo vita-ragah
yad icchanto brahmacaryam caranti
tat te padam sangrahena pravaksye
SYNONYMS
yat--that 
which; 
aksaram--inexhaustible; 
veda-vidah--a 
person
conversant with the Vedas; vadanti--say; visanti--enters; yat--in
which; yatayah--great sages; vita-ragah--in the renounced order of
life; yat--that which; icchantah--desiring; brahmacaryam--celibacy;
caranti--practices; tat--that; te--unto you; padam--situation;
sangrahena--in summary; pravaksye--I shall explain.
TRANSLATION
Persons learned in the Vedas, who utter omkara and who are great sages
in the renounced order, enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection,
one practices celibacy. I shall now explain to you this process by
which one may attain salvation.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna explains that Brahman, although one without a second, has
different manifestations and features. For the impersonalists, the
syllable om is identical with Brahman. Krsna here explains the
impersonal Brahman, in which the renounced order of sages enter.
In the Vedic system of knowledge, students, from the very beginning,
are taught to vibrate om and learn of the ultimate impersonal Brahman
by living with the spiritual master in complete celibacy. In this way
they realize two of Brahman's features. This practice is very essential
for the student's advancement in spiritual life, but at the moment such
brahmacari (unmarried celibate) life is not at all possible. The social
construction of the world has changed so much that there is no
possibility of one's practicing celibacy from the beginning of student
life. Throughout the world there are many institutions for different
departments of knowledge, but there is no recognized institution where
students can be educated in the brahmacari principles. Unless one
practices celibacy, advancement in spiritual life is very difficult.
Therefore Lord Caitanya has announced, according to the scriptural
injunctions for this Age of Kali, that no process of realizing the
Supreme is possible except the chanting of the holy name of Lord Krsna:
Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,
Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 12
sarva-dvarani samyamya
mano hrdi nirudhya ca
murdhny adhayatmanah pranam
asthito yoga-dharanam
SYNONYMS
sarva-dvarani--all the doors of the body; samyamya--controlling; manah-
-mind; hrdi--in the heart; nirudhya--confined; ca--also; murdhni--on
the head; adhaya--fixed; atmanah--soul; pranam--the life air; asthitah-
-situated; yoga-dharanam--the yogic situation.
TRANSLATION
The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements.
Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart
and the life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in
yoga.
PURPORT
To practice yoga, as suggested here, one first has to close the door of
all sense enjoyment. This practice is called pratyahara, or withdrawing
the senses from the sense objects. The sense organs for acquiring
knowledge, such as the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch, should be
fully controlled and should not be allowed to engage in self-
gratification. In this way the mind focuses on the Supersoul in the
heart and the life force is raised to the top of the head. In the Sixth
Chapter this process is described in detail. But as mentioned before,
this practice is not practical in this age. The best process is Krsna
consciousness. If one is always able to fix his mind on Krsna in
devotional service, it is very easy for him to remain in an undisturbed
transcendental trance, or in samadhi.
TEXT 13
om ity ekaksaram brahma
vyaharan mam anusmaran
yah prayati tyajan deham
sa yati paramam gatim
SYNONYMS
om--the combination of letters om (omkara); iti--thus; eka-aksaram--
supreme, indestructible; brahma--absolute; vyaharan--vibrating; mam--Me
(Krsna); anusmaran--remembering; yah--anyone; prayati--leaves; tyajan--
quitting; deham--this body; sah--he; yati--achieves; paramam--supreme;
gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
syllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly
reach the spiritual planets.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated here that om, Brahman, and Lord Krsna are not
different. The impersonal sound of Krsna is om, but the sound Hare
Krsna contains om. It is clearly recommended in this age that if one
quits his body at the end of this life chanting the maha-mantra, Hare
Krsna, he will reach the spiritual planets. Similarly, those who are
devotees of Krsna enter the Krsna planet or Goloka Vrndavana, whereas
the impersonalists remain in the brahmajyoti. The personalists also
enter many innumerable planets in the spiritual sky known as
Vaikunthas.
TEXT 14
ananya-cetah satatam
yo mam smarati nityasah
tasyaham sulabhah partha
nitya-yuktasya yoginah
SYNONYMS
ananya-cetah--without deviation; satatam--always; yah--anyone; mam--Me
(Krsna); smarati--remembers; nityasah--regularly; tasya--to him; aham--
I am; su-labhah--very easy to achieve; partha--O son of Prtha; nitya--
regularly; yuktasya--engaged; yoginah--of the devotee.
TRANSLATION
For one who remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son
of Prtha, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.
PURPORT
In this verse the bhakti-yoga of the unalloyed devotees of the Supreme
Godhead is described. The proceeding verses mention four different
kinds of devotees--the distressed, the inquisitive, those who seek
material gain, and the speculative philosophers. Different processes of
liberation from material entanglement have also been described: karma-
yoga, jnana-yoga, and hatha-yoga. But here bhakti-yoga, without any
mixture of these, is mentioned. In bhakti-yoga the devotees desire
nothing but Krsna. The pure bhakti devotee does not desire promotion to
heavenly planets, nor does he seek salvation or liberation from
material entanglement. A pure devotee does not desire anything. In the
Caitanya-caritamrta the pure devotee is called niskama, which means he
has no desire for self-interest. Perfect peace belongs to him alone,
not to those who strive for personal gain. The pure devotee only wants
to please the Supreme Lord, and so the Lord says that for anyone who is
unflinchingly devoted to Him, He is easy to attain. The devotee can
render service to any of the transcendental forms of the Supreme Lord,
and he meets with none of the problems that plague the practitioners of
other yogas. Bhakti-yoga is very simple and pure and easy to perform.
One can begin simply by chanting Hare Krsna. Krsna is very merciful to
those who engage in His service, and He helps in various ways that
devotee who has fully surrendered to Him so that he can understand Him
as He is. The Lord gives such a devotee sufficient intelligence so that
ultimately the devotee can attain Him in His spiritual kingdom.
The special qualification of the pure devotee is that he is always
thinking of Krsna without considering the time or place. There should
be no impediments. He should be able to carry out his service anywhere
and at any time. Some say that the devotee should remain in holy places
like Vrndavana or some holy town where the Lord lived, but a pure
devotee can live anywhere and create the atmosphere of Vrndavana by his
devotional service. It was Sri Advaita who told Lord Caitanya,
"Wherever You are, O Lord--there is Vrndavana."
A pure devotee constantly remembers Krsna and meditates upon Him. These
are qualifications of the pure devotee for whom the Lord is most easily
attainable. Bhakti-yoga is the system that the Gita recommends above
all others. Generally, the bhakti-yogis are engaged in five different
ways: 1) santa-bhakta, engaged in devotional service in neutrality; 2)
dasya-bhakta, engaged in devotional service as servant; 3) sakhya-
bhakta, engaged as friend; 4) vatsalya-bhakta, engaged as parent; and
5) madhurya-bhakta, engaged as conjugal lover of the Supreme Lord. In
any of these ways, the pure devotee is always constantly engaged in the
transcendental loving service of the Supreme Lord and cannot forget the
Supreme Lord, and so for him the Lord is easily attained. A pure
devotee cannot forget the Supreme Lord for a moment, and similarly, the
Supreme Lord cannot forget His pure devotee for a moment. This is the
great blessing of the Krsna conscious process of chanting the maha-
mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
TEXT 15
mam upetya punar janma
duhkhalayam asasvatam
napnuvanti mahatmanah
samsiddhim paramam gatah
SYNONYMS
mam--unto Me; upetya--achieving; punah--again; janma--birth; duhkha-
alayam--a place of miseries; asasvatam--temporary; na--never;
apnuvanti--attain; maha-atmanah--the great souls; samsiddhim--
perfection; paramam--ultimate; gatah--achieved.
TRANSLATION
After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogis in devotion, never
return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they
have attained the highest perfection.
PURPORT
Since this temporary material world is full of the miseries of birth,
old age, disease and death, naturally he who achieves the highest
perfection and attains the supreme planet, Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana,
does not wish to return. The supreme planet is described in Vedic
literature as beyond our material vision, and it is considered the
highest goal. The mahatmas (great souls) receive transcendental
messages from the realized devotees and thus gradually develop
devotional service in Krsna consciousness and become so absorbed in
transcendental service that they no longer desire elevation to any of
the material planets, nor do they even want to be transferred to any
spiritual planet. They only want Krsna's association and nothing else.
Such great souls in Krsna consciousness attain the highest perfection
of life. In other words, they are the supreme souls.
TEXT 16
abrahma-bhuvanal lokah
punar avartino 'rjuna
mam upetya tu kaunteya
punar janma na vidyate
SYNONYMS
abrahma--up to the Brahmaloka planet; bhuvanat--from the planetary
systems; lokah--planets; punah--again; avartinah--returning; arjuna--O
Arjuna; mam--unto Me; upetya--arriving; tu--but; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; punah janma--rebirth; na--never; vidyate--takes to.
TRANSLATION
From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all
are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But
one who attains to My abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth again.
PURPORT
All kinds of yogis--karma, jnana, hatha, etc.--eventually have to
attain devotional perfection in bhakti-yoga, or Krsna consciousness,
before they can go to Krsna's transcendental abode and never return.
Those who attain the highest material planets or the planets of the
demigods are again subjected to repeated birth and death. As persons on
earth are elevated to higher planets, people in higher planets such as
Brahmaloka, Candraloka and Indraloka fall down to earth. The practice
of sacrifice called pancagni-vidya, recommended in the Katha Upanisad,
enables one to achieve Brahmaloka, but if, in Brahmaloka, one does not
cultivate Krsna consciousness, then he must return to earth. Those who
progress in Krsna consciousness in the higher planets are gradually
elevated to higher and higher planets and at the time of universal
devastation are transferred to the eternal spiritual kingdom. When
there is devastation of this material universe, Brahma and his
devotees, who are constantly engaged in Krsna consciousness, are all
transferred to the spiritual universe and to specific spiritual planets
according to their desires.
TEXT 17
sahasra-yuga-paryantam
ahar yad brahmano viduh
ratrim yuga-sahasrantam
te 'ho-ratra-vido janah
SYNONYMS
sahasra--thousand; yuga--millenniums; paryantam--including; ahah--day;
yat--that; brahmanah--of Brahma; viduh--they know; ratrim--night; yuga-
-millenniums; sahasra-antam--similarly, at the end of one thousand; te-
-that; ahah-ratra--day and night; vidah--understand; janah--people.
TRANSLATION
By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the duration of
Brahma's one day. And such also is the duration of his night.
PURPORT
The duration of the material universe is limited. It is manifested in
cycles of kalpas. A kalpa is a day of Brahma, and one day of Brahma
consists of a thousand cycles of four yugas or ages: Satya, Treta,
Dvapara and Kali. The cycle of Satya is characterized by virtue, wisdom
and religion, there being practically no ignorance and vice, and the
yuga lasts 1,728,000 years. In the Treta-yuga vice is introduced, and
this yuga lasts 1,296,000 years. In the Dvapara-yuga there is an even
greater decline in virtue and religion, vice increasing, and this yuga
lasts 864,000 years. And finally in Kali-yuga (the yuga that we have
now been experiencing over the past 5,000 years) there is an abundance
of strife, ignorance, irreligion and vice, true virtue being
practically nonexistent, and this yuga lasts 432,000 years. In Kali-
yuga vice increases to such a point that at the termination of the yuga
the Supreme Lord Himself appears as the Kalki avatara, vanquishes the
demons, saves His devotees, and commences another Satya-yuga. Then the
process is set rolling again. These four yugas, rotating a thousand
times, comprise one day of Brahma, the creator god, and the same number
comprise one night. Brahma lives one hundred of such "years" and then
dies. These "hundred years" by earth calculations total to 311 trillion
and 40 billion earth years. By these calculations the life of Brahma
seems fantastic and interminable, but from the viewpoint of eternity it
is as brief as a lightning flash. In the Causal Ocean there are
innumerable Brahmas rising and disappearing like bubbles in the
Atlantic. Brahma and his creation are all part of the material
universe, and therefore they are in constant flux.
In the material universe not even Brahma is free from the process of
birth, old age, disease and death. Brahma, however, is directly engaged
in the service of the Supreme Lord in the management of the universe--
therefore he at once attains liberation. Elevated sannyasis are
promoted to Brahma's particular planet, Brahmaloka, which is the
highest planet in the material universe and which survives all the
heavenly planets in the upper strata of the planetary system, but in
due course Brahma and all the inhabitants of Brahmaloka are subject to
death, according to the law of material nature.
TEXT 18
avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
prabhavanty ahar-agame
ratry-agame praliyante
tatraivavyakta-samjnake
SYNONYMS
avyaktat--from the unmanifest; vyaktayah--living entities; sarvah--all;
prabhavanti--come into being; ahah-agame--at the beginning of the day;
ratri-agame--at the fall of night; praliyante--are annihilated; tatra--
there; eva--certainly; avyakta--the unmanifest; samjnake--called.
TRANSLATION
When Brahma's day is manifest, this multitude of living entities comes
into being, and at the arrival of Brahma's night they are all
annihilated.
TEXT 19
bhuta-gramah sa evayam
bhutva bhutva praliyate
ratry-agame 'vasah partha
prabhavaty ahar-agame
SYNONYMS
bhuta-gramah--the aggregate of all living entities; sah--they; eva--
certainly; ayam--this; bhutva bhutva--taking birth; praliyate--
annihilate; ratri--night; agame--on arrival; avasah--automatically;
partha--O son of Prtha; prabhavati--manifest; ahah--during daytime;
agame--on arrival.
TRANSLATION
Again and again the day comes, and this host of beings is active; and
again the night falls, O Partha, and they are helplessly dissolved.
PURPORT
The less intelligent jivas, who try to remain within this material
world, are accordingly elevated and degraded in the various planetary
systems. During the daytime of Brahma they exhibit their activities,
and at the coming of Brahma's night they are annihilated. In the day
they receive various bodies for material activities, and at night these
bodies perish. The jivas (individual souls) remain compact in the body
of Visnu and again and again are manifest at the arrival of Brahma's
day. When Brahma's life is finally finished, they are all annihilated
and remain unmanifest for millions and millions of years. When Brahma
is born again in another millennium they are again manifest. In this
way the jivas are captivated by the material world. However, those
intelligent beings who take to Krsna consciousness and chant Hare
Krsna, Hare Rama in devotional service transfer themselves, even in
this life, to the spiritual planet of Krsna and become eternally
blissful there, not being subject to such rebirths.
TEXT 20
paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanah
yah sa sarvesu bhutesu
nasyatsu na vinasyati
SYNONYMS
parah--transcendental; tasmat--from that; tu--but; bhavah--nature;
anyah--another; avyaktah--unmanifest; avyaktat--from the unmanifest;
sanatanah--eternal; yah--that;  sah--which; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--
manifestation; nasyatsu--being annihilated; na--never; vinasyati--
annihilated.
TRANSLATION
Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to
this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never
annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains
as it is.
PURPORT
Krsna's superior spiritual energy is transcendental and eternal. It is
beyond all the changes of material nature, which is manifest and
annihilated during the days and nights of Brahma. Krsna's superior
energy is completely opposite in quality to material nature. Superior
and inferior nature are explained in the Seventh Chapter.
TEXT 21
avyakto 'ksara ity uktas
tam ahuh paramam gatim
yam prapya na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama
SYNONYMS
avyaktah--unmanifested; aksarah--infallible; iti--thus; uktah--said;
tam--that which; ahuh--is known; paramam--ultimate; gatim--destination;
yam--that which; prapya--gaining; na--never; nivartante--comes back;
tat dhama--that abode; paramam--supreme; mama--Mine.
TRANSLATION
That supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the
supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes back. That is
My supreme abode.
PURPORT
The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described in
the Brahma-samhita as cintamani-dhama, a place where all desires are
fulfilled. The supreme abode of Lord Krsna known as Goloka Vrndavana is
full of palaces made of touchstone. There are also trees which are
called "desire trees," that supply any type of eatable upon demand, and
there are cows known as surabhi cows which supply a limitless supply of
milk. In this abode, the Lord is served by hundreds of thousands of
goddesses of fortune (Laksmis), and He is called Govinda, the primal
Lord and the cause of all causes. The Lord is accustomed to blow His
flute (venum kvanantam). His transcendental form is the most attractive
in all the worlds--His eyes are like the lotus petals and the color of
His body is like clouds. He is so attractive that His beauty excels
that of thousands of Cupids. He wears saffron cloth, a garland around
His neck and a peacock feather in His hair. In the Gita Lord Krsna
gives only a small hint of His personal abode (Goloka Vrndavana) which
is the supermost planet in the spiritual kingdom. A vivid description
is given in the Brahma-samhita. Vedic literature (Katha Upanisad
1.3.11) states that there is nothing superior to the abode of the
Supreme Godhead, and that that abode is the ultimate destination
(purusan na param kincit sa kastha parama gatih). When one attains to
it, he never returns to the material world. Krsna's supreme abode and
Krsna Himself are nondifferent, being of the same quality. On this
earth, Vrndavana, ninety miles southeast of Delhi, is a replica of that
supreme Goloka Vrndavana located in the spiritual sky. When Krsna
descended on this earth He sported on that particular tract of land
known as Vrndavana in the district of Mathura, India.
TEXT 22
purusah sa parah partha
bhaktya labhyas tv ananyaya
yasyantah-sthani bhutani
yena sarvam idam tatam
SYNONYMS
purusah--the Supreme Personality; sah--He; parah--the Supreme, than
whom no one is greater; partha--O son of Prtha; bhaktya--by devotional
service; labhyah--can be achieved; tu--but; ananyaya--unalloyed,
undeviating devotion; yasya--whom; antah-sthani--within; bhutani--all
of this material manifestation; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--
whatever we can see; tatam--distributed.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is
attainable by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode,
He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.
PURPORT
It is here clearly stated that the supreme destination from which there
is no return is the abode of Krsna, the Supreme Person. The Brahma-
samhita describes this supreme abode as ananda-cinmaya-rasa, a place
where everything is full of spiritual bliss. Whatever variegatedness is
manifest there is all of the quality of spiritual bliss--there is
nothing material. All variegatedness is expanded as the spiritual
expansion of the Supreme Godhead Himself, for the manifestation there
is totally of the spiritual energy, as explained in Chapter Seven. As
far as this material world is concerned, although the Lord is always in
His supreme abode, He is nonetheless all-pervading by His material
energy. So by His spiritual and material energies He is present
everywhere--both in the material and in the spiritual universes.
Yasyantah-sthani means that everything is sustained by Him, whether it
be spiritual or material energy.
It is clearly stated here that only by bhakti, or devotional service,
can one enter into the Vaikuntha (spiritual) planetary system. In all
the Vaikunthas there is only one Supreme Godhead, Krsna, who has
expanded Himself into millions and millions of plenary expansions.
These plenary expansions are four-armed, and They preside over the
innumerable spiritual planets. They are known by a variety of names--
Purusottama, Trivikrama, Kesava, Madhava, Aniruddha, Hrsikesa,
Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Sridhara, Vasudeva, Damodara, Janardana,
Narayana, Vamana, Padmanabha, etc. These plenary expansions are likened
unto the leaves of a tree, and the main tree is likened to Krsna.
Krsna, dwelling in Goloka Vrndavana, His supreme abode, systematically
conducts all affairs of both universes (material and spiritual) without
a flaw by power of His all-pervasiveness.
TEXT 23
yatra kale tv anavrttim
avrttim caiva yoginah
prayata yanti tam kalam
vaksyami bharatarsabha
SYNONYMS
yatra--in that; kale--time; tu--but; anavrttim--no return; avrttim--
return; ca--also; eva--certainly; yoginah--of different kinds of
mystics; prayatah--one who goes; yanti--departs; tam--that; kalam--
time; vaksyami--describing; bharatarsabha--O best of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bharatas, I shall now explain to you the different times
at which, passing away from this world, one does or does not come back.
PURPORT
The unalloyed devotees of the Supreme Lord who are totally surrendered
souls do not care when they leave their bodies or by what method. They
leave everything in Krsna's hands and so easily and happily return to
Godhead. But those who are not unalloyed devotees and who depend
instead on such methods of spiritual realization as karma-yoga, jnana-
yoga, hatha-yoga, etc., must leave the body at a suitable time and
thereby be assured whether or not they will return to the world of
birth and death.
If the yogi is perfect, he can select the time and place for leaving
this material world, but if he is not so perfect, then he has to leave
at nature's will. The most suitable time to leave the body and not
return is being explained by the Lord in these verses. According to
Acarya Baladeva Vidyabhusana, the Sanskrit word kala used herein refers
to the presiding deity of time.
TEXT 24
agnir jyotir ahah suklah
san-masa uttarayanam
tatra prayata gacchanti
brahma brahma-vido janah
SYNONYMS
agnih--fire; jyotih--light; ahah--day; suklah--white; sat-masah--six
months; uttara-ayanam--when the sun passes on the northern side; tatra-
-there; prayatah--one who goes; gacchanti--passes away; brahma--to the
Absolute; brahma-vidah--one who knows the Absolute; janah--person.
TRANSLATION
Those who know the Supreme Brahman pass away from the world during the
influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment,
during the fortnight of the moon and the six months when the sun
travels in the north.
PURPORT
When fire, light, day and moon are as mentioned, it is to be understood
that over all of them there are various presiding deities who make
arrangements for the passage of the soul. At the time of death, the
jiva sets forth on the path to a new life. If one leaves the body at
the time designated above, either accidentally or by arrangement, it is
possible for him to attain the impersonal brahmajyoti. Mystics who are
advanced in yoga practice can arrange the time and place to leave the
body. Others have no control--if by accident they leave at an
auspicious moment, then they will not return to the cycle of birth and
death, but if not, then there is every possibility that they will have
to return. However, for the pure devotee in Krsna consciousness, there
is no fear of returning, whether he leaves the body at an auspicious or
inauspicious moment, by accident or arrangement.
TEXT 25
dhumo ratris tatha krsnah
san-masa daksinayanam
tatra candramasam jyotir
yogi prapya nivartate
SYNONYMS
dhumah--smoke; ratrih--night; tatha--also; krsnah--the fortnight of the
dark moon; sat-masah--the six months; daksina-ayanam--when the sun
passes on the southern side; tatra--there; candra-masam--the moon
planet; jyotih--light; yogi--the mystic; prapya--achieves; nivartate--
comes back.
TRANSLATION
The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night,
the moonless fortnight, or the six months when the sun passes to the
south, or who reaches the moon planet, again comes back.
PURPORT
In the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam we are informed that those who
are expert in fruitive activities and sacrificial methods on earth
attain to the moon at death. These elevated souls live on the moon for
about 10,000 years (by demigod calculations) and enjoy life by drinking
soma-rasa. They eventually return to earth. This means that on the moon
there are higher classes of living beings, though they may not be
perceived by the gross senses.
TEXT 26
sukla-krsne gati hy ete
jagatah sasvate mate
ekaya yaty anavrttim
anyayavartate punah
SYNONYMS
sukla--light; krsne--darkness; gati--passing away; hi--certainly; ete--
all these; jagatah--of the material world; sasvate--of the Vedas; mate-
-in the opinion; ekaya--by one; yati--goes; anavrttim--no return;
anyaya--by the other; avartate--comes back; punah--again.
TRANSLATION
According to the Vedas, there are two ways of passing from this world--
one in the light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does
not come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.
PURPORT
The same description of departure and return is quoted by Acarya
Baladeva Vidyabhusana from the Chandogya Upanisad (5.10.3-5). In such a
way, those who are fruitive laborers and philosophical speculators from
time immemorial are constantly going and coming. Actually they do not
attain ultimate salvation, for they do not surrender to Krsna.
TEXT 27
naite srti partha janan
yogi muhyati kascana
tasmat sarvesu kalesu
yoga-yukto bhavarjuna
SYNONYMS
na--never; ete--all these; srti--different paths; partha--O son of
Prtha; janan--even if they know; yogi--the devotees of the Lord;
muhyati--bewildered; kascana--anyone; tasmat--therefore; sarvesu
kalesu--always; yoga-yuktah--being engaged in Krsna consciousness;
bhava--just become; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
The devotees who know these two paths, O Arjuna, are never bewildered.
Therefore be always fixed in devotion.
PURPORT
Krsna is here advising Arjuna that he should not be disturbed by the
different paths the soul can take when leaving the material world. A
devotee of the Supreme Lord should not worry whether he will depart
either by arrangement or by accident. The devotee should be firmly
established in Krsna consciousness and chant Hare Krsna. He should know
that concern over either of these two paths is troublesome. The best
way to be absorbed in Krsna consciousness is to be always dovetailed in
His service, and that will make one's path to the spiritual kingdom
safe, certain, and direct. The word yoga-yukta is especially
significant in this verse. One who is firm in yoga is constantly
engaged in Krsna consciousness in all his activities. Sri Rupa Gosvami
advises that one should be unattached in the material world and that
all affairs should be steeped in Krsna consciousness. In this way one
attains perfection. Therefore the devotee is not disturbed by these
descriptions because he knows that his passage to the supreme abode is
guaranteed by devotional service.
TEXT 28
vedesu yajnesu tapahsu caiva
danesu yat punya-phalam pradistam
atyeti tat sarvam idam viditva
yogi param sthanam upaiti cadyam
SYNONYMS
vedesu--in the study of the Vedas; yajnesu--in the performances of
yajna, sacrifice; tapahsu--undergoing different types of austerities;
ca--also; eva--certainly; danesu--in giving charities; yat--that which;
punya-phalam--the result of pious work; pradistam--directed; atyeti--
surpasses; tat--all those;  sarvam idam--all those described above;
viditva--knowing; yogi--the devotee; param--supreme; sthanam--abode;
upaiti--achieved peace; ca--also; adyam--original.
TRANSLATION
A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of
the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austere
sacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive
activities. At the end he reaches the supreme abode.
PURPORT
This verse is the summation of the Seventh and Eighth chapters,
particularly as the chapters deal with Krsna consciousness and
devotional service. One has to study the Vedas under the guidance of
the spiritual master and undergo many austerities and penances while
living under his care. A brahmacari has to live in the home of the
spiritual master just like a servant, and he must beg alms from door to
door and bring them to the spiritual master. He takes food only under
the master's order, and if the master neglects to call the student for
food that day, the student fasts. These are some of the Vedic
principles for observing brahmacarya.
After the student studies the Vedas under the master for a period from
five to twenty years, he may become a man of perfect character. Study
of the Vedas is not meant for the recreation of armchair speculators,
but for the formation of character. After this training, the brahmacari
is allowed to enter into household life and marry. When he is a
householder, he also has to perform many sacrifices and strive for
further enlightenment. Then after retiring from household life, upon
accepting the order of vanaprastha, he undergoes severe penances, such
as living in forests, dressing with tree bark, not shaving, etc. By
carrying out the orders of brahmacarya, householder, vanaprastha and
finally sannyasa, one becomes elevated to the perfectional stage of
life. Some are then elevated to the heavenly kingdoms, and when they
become even more advanced they are liberated in the spiritual sky,
either in the impersonal brahmajyoti or in the Vaikuntha planets or
Krsnaloka. This is the path outlined by Vedic literatures.
The beauty of Krsna consciousness, however, is that by one stroke, by
engaging in devotional service, one can surpass all rituals of the
different orders of life.
One should try to understand the Seventh and Eighth Chapters of the
Gita not by scholarship or mental speculation, but by hearing them in
association with pure devotees. Chapters Seven through Twelve are the
essence of Gita, if one is fortunate to understand the Gita--especially
these middle six chapters--in the association of devotees, then his
life at once becomes glorified beyond all penances, sacrifices,
charities, speculations, etc. One should hear the Gita from the devotee
because at the beginning of the Fourth Chapter it is stated that the
Gita can only be perfectly understood by devotees. Hearing the Gita
from devotees, not from mental speculators, is called faith. Through
association of devotees, one is placed in devotional service, and by
this service Krsna's activities, form, pastimes, name, etc., become
clear, and all misgivings are dispelled. Then once doubts are removed,
the study of the Gita becomes extremely pleasurable, and one develops a
taste and feeling for Krsna consciousness. In the advanced stage, one
falls completely in love with Krsna, and that is the beginning of the
highest perfectional stage of life which prepares the devotee's
transferral to Krsna's abode in the spiritual sky, Goloka Vrndavana,
where the devotee enters into eternal happiness.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Attaining the Supreme.