Chapter 5
Karma-yoga--Action in Krsna Consciousness
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
sannyasam karmanam krsna
punar yogam ca samsasi
yac chreya etayor ekam
tan me bruhi su-niscitam
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasam--renunciation; karmanam--of all
activities; krsna--O Krsna; punah--again; yogam--devotional service;
ca--also; samsasi--You are praising; yat--which; sreyah--is beneficial;
etayoh--of these two; ekam--one; tat--that; me--unto me; bruhi--please
tell; su-niscitam--definitely.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Krsna, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and
then again You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tell
me definitely which of the two is more beneficial?
PURPORT
In this Fifth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord says that work in
devotional service is better than dry mental speculation. Devotional
service is easier than the latter because, being transcendental in
nature, it frees one from reaction. In the Second Chapter, preliminary
knowledge of the soul and its entanglement in the material body were
explained. How to get out of this material encagement by buddhi-yoga,
or devotional service, was also explained therein. In the Third
Chapter, it was explained that a person who is situated on the platform
of knowledge no longer has any duties to perform. And, in the Fourth
Chapter, the Lord told Arjuna that all kinds of sacrificial work
culminate in knowledge. However, at the end of the Fourth Chapter, the
Lord advised Arjuna to wake up and fight, being situated in perfect
knowledge. Therefore, by simultaneously stressing the importance of
both work in devotion and inaction in knowledge, Krsna has perplexed
Arjuna and confused his determination. Arjuna understands that
renunciation in knowledge involves cessation of all kinds of work
performed as sense activities. But if one performs work in devotional
service, then how is work stopped? In other words, he thinks that
sannyasa, or renunciation in knowledge, should be altogether free from
all kinds of activity because work and renunciation appear to him to be
incompatible. He appears not to have understood that work in full
knowledge is nonreactive and is therefore the same as inaction. He
inquires, therefore, whether he should cease work altogether, or work
with full knowledge.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
sannyasah karma-yogas ca
nihsreyasa-karav ubhau
tayos tu karma-sannyasat
karma-yogo visisyate
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; sannyasah--
renunciation of work; karma-yogah--work in devotion; ca--also;
nihsreyasa-karau--all leading to the path of liberation; ubhau--both;
tayoh--of the two; tu--but; karma-sannyasat--in comparison to the
renunciation of fruitive work; karma-yogah--work in devotion;
visisyate--is better.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: The renunciation of work and work in devotion
are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional
service is better than renunciation of works.
PURPORT
Fruitive activities (seeking sense gratification) are cause for
material bondage. As long as one is engaged in activities aimed at
improving the standard of bodily comfort, one is sure to transmigrate
to different types of bodies, thereby continuing material bondage
perpetually. Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.4-6) confirms this as follows:
nunam pramattah kurute vikarma
yad indriya-pritaya aprnoti
na sadhu manye yata atmano 'yam
asann api klesa-da asa dehah
parabhavas tavad abodha-jato
yavan na jijnasata atma-tattvam
yavat kriyas tavad idam mano vai
karmatmakam yena sarira-bandhah
evam manah karma-vasam prayunkte
avidyayatmany upadhiyamane
pritir na yavan mayi vasudeve
na mucyate deha-yogena tavat
"People are mad after sense gratification, and they do not know that
this present body, which is full of miseries, is a result of one's
fruitive activities in the past. Although this body is temporary, it is
always giving one trouble in many ways. Therefore, to act for sense
gratification is not good. One is considered to be a failure in life as
long as he makes no inquiry about his real identity. As long as he does
not know his real identity, he has to work for fruitive results for
sense gratification, and as long as one is engrossed in the
consciousness of sense gratification one has to transmigrate from one
body to another. Although the mind may be engrossed in fruitive
activities and influenced by ignorance, one must develop a love for
devotional service to Vasudeva. Only then can one have the opportunity
to get out of the bondage of material existence."
Therefore, jnana (or knowledge that one is not this material body but
spirit soul) is not sufficient for liberation. One has to act in the
status of spirit soul, otherwise there is no escape from material
bondage. Action in Krsna consciousness is not, however, action on the
fruitive platform. Activities performed in full knowledge strengthen
one's advancement in real knowledge. Without Krsna consciousness, mere
renunciation of fruitive activities does not actually purify the heart
of a conditioned soul. As long as the heart is not purified, one has to
work on the fruitive platform. But action in Krsna consciousness
automatically helps one escape the result of fruitive action so that
one need not descend to the material platform. Therefore, action in
Krsna consciousness is always superior to renunciation, which always
entails a risk of falling. Renunciation without Krsna consciousness is
incomplete, as is confirmed by Srila Rupa Gosvami in his Bhakti-
rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.258):
prapancikataya buddhya
hari-sambandhi-vastunah
mumuksubhih parityago
vairagyam phalgu kathyate
"Renunciation by persons eager to achieve liberation of things which
are related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, though they are
material, is called incomplete renunciation." Renunciation is complete
when it is in the knowledge that everything in existence belongs to the
Lord and that no one should claim proprietorship over anything. One
should understand that, factually, nothing belongs to anyone. Then
where is the question of renunciation? One who knows that everything is
Krsna's property is always situated in renunciation. Since everything
belongs to Krsna, everything should be employed in the service of
Krsna. This perfect form of action in Krsna consciousness is far better
than any amount of artificial renunciation by a sannyasi of the
Mayavadi school.
TEXT 3
jneyah sa nitya-sannyasi
yo na dvesti na kanksati
nirdvandvo hi maha-baho
sukham bandhat pramucyate
SYNONYMS
jneyah--should be known; sah--he; nitya--always; sannyasi--renouncer;
yah--who; na--never; dvesti--abhors; na--nor; kanksati--desires;
nirdvandvah--free from all dualities; hi--certainly; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; sukham--happily; bandhat--from bondage; pramucyate--
is completely liberated.
TRANSLATION
One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known
to be always renounced. Such a person, free from all dualities, easily
overcomes material bondage and is completely liberated, O mighty-armed
Arjuna.
PURPORT
One who is fully in Krsna consciousness is always a renouncer because
he feels neither hatred nor desire for the results of his actions. Such
a renouncer, dedicated to the transcendental loving service of the
Lord, is fully qualified in knowledge because he knows his
constitutional position in his relationship with Krsna. He knows fully
well that Krsna is the whole and that he is part and parcel of Krsna.
Such knowledge is perfect because it is qualitatively and
quantitatively correct. The concept of oneness with Krsna is incorrect
because the part cannot be equal to the whole. Knowledge that one is
one in quality yet different in quantity is correct transcendental
knowledge leading one to become full in himself, having nothing to
aspire to or lament over. There is no duality in his mind because
whatever he does, he does for Krsna. Being thus freed from the platform
of dualities, he is liberated--even in this material world.
TEXT 4
sankhya-yogau prthag balah
pravadanti na panditah
ekam apy asthitah samyag
ubhayor vindate phalam
SYNONYMS
sankhya--analytical study of the material world; yogau--work in
devotional service; prthak--different; balah--the less intelligent;
pravadanti--say; na--never; panditah--the learned; ekam--in one; api--
even; asthitah--being situated; samyak--complete; ubhayoh--of both;
vindate--enjoys; phalam--the result.
TRANSLATION
Only the ignorant speak of devotional service [karma-yoga] as being
different from the analytical study of the material world [Sankhya].
Those who are actually learned say that he who applies himself well to
one of these paths achieves the results of both.
PURPORT
The aim of the analytical study of the material world is to find the
soul of existence. The soul of the material world is Visnu, or the
Supersoul. Devotional service to the Lord entails service to the
Supersoul. One process is to find the root of the tree, and the other
is to water the root. The real student of Sankhya philosophy finds the
root of the material world, Visnu, and then, in perfect knowledge,
engages himself in the service of the Lord. Therefore, in essence,
there is no difference between the two because the aim of both is
Visnu. Those who do not know the ultimate end say that the purposes of
Sankhya and karma-yoga are not the same, but one who is learned knows
the unifying aim in these different processes.
TEXT 5
yat sankhyaih prapyate sthanam
tad yogair api gamyate
ekam sankhyam ca yogam ca
yah pasyati sa pasyati
SYNONYMS
yat--what; sankhyaih--by means of Sankhya philosophy; prapyate--is
achieved; sthanam--place; tat--that; yogaih--by devotional service;
api--also; gamyate--one can attain; ekam--one; sankhyam--analytical
study; ca--and; yogam--action in devotion; ca--and; yah--one who;
pasyati--sees; sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.
TRANSLATION
One who knows that the position reached by means of analytical study
can also be attained by devotional service, and who therefore sees
analytical study and devotional service to be on the same level, sees
things as they are.
PURPORT
The real purpose of philosophical research is to find the ultimate goal
of life. Since the ultimate goal of life is self-realization, there is
no difference between the conclusions reached by the two processes. By
Sankhya philosophical research one comes to the conclusion that a
living entity is not a part and parcel of the material world but of the
supreme spirit whole. Consequently, the spirit soul has nothing to do
with the material world; his actions must be in some relation with the
Supreme. When he acts in Krsna consciousness, he is actually in his
constitutional position. In the first process, Sankhya, one has to
become detached from matter, and in the devotional yoga process one has
to attach himself to the work of Krsna consciousness. Factually, both
processes are the same, although superficially one process appears to
involve detachment and the other process appears to involve attachment.
Detachment from matter and attachment to Krsna are one and the same.
One who can see this sees things as they are.
TEXT 6
sannyasas tu maha-baho
duhkham aptum ayogatah
yoga-yukto munir brahma
na cirenadhigacchati
SYNONYMS
sannyasah--the renounced order of life; tu--but; maha-baho--O mighty-
armed one; duhkham--distress; aptum--afflicts one with; ayogatah--
without devotional service; yoga-yuktah--one engaged in devotional
service; munih--a thinker; brahma--the Supreme; na cirena--without
delay; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATION
Merely renouncing all activities yet not engaging in the devotional
service of the Lord cannot make one happy. But a thoughtful person
engaged in devotional service can achieve the Supreme without delay.
PURPORT
There are two classes of sannyasis, or persons in the renounced order
of life. The Mayavadi sannyasis are engaged in the study of Sankhya
philosophy, whereas the Vaisnava sannyasis are engaged in the study of
Bhagavatam philosophy, which affords the proper commentary on the
Vedanta-sutras. The Mayavadi sannyasis also study the Vedanta-sutras,
but use their own commentary, called Sariraka-bhasya, written by
Sankaracarya. The students of the Bhagavata school are engaged in the
devotional service of the Lord, according to pancaratriki regulations,
and therefore the Vaisnava sannyasis have multiple engagements in the
transcendental service of the Lord. The Vaisnava sannyasis have nothing
to do with material activities, and yet they perform various activities
in their devotional service to the Lord. But the Mayavadi sannyasis,
engaged in the studies of Sankhya and Vedanta and speculation, cannot
relish the transcendental service of the Lord. Because their studies
become very tedious, they sometimes become tired of Brahman
speculation, and thus they take shelter of the Bhagavatam without
proper understanding. Consequently their study of the Srimad-Bhagavatam
becomes troublesome. Dry speculations and impersonal interpretations by
artificial means are all useless for the Mayavadi sannyasis. The
Vaisnava sannyasis, who are engaged in devotional service, are happy in
the discharge of their transcendental duties, and they have the
guarantee of ultimate entrance into the kingdom of God. The Mayavadi
sannyasis sometimes fall down from the path of self-realization and
again enter into material activities of a philanthropic and altruistic
nature, which are nothing but material engagements. Therefore, the
conclusion is that those who are engaged in Krsna conscious activities
are better situated than the sannyasis engaged in simple speculation
about what is Brahman and what is not Brahman, although they too come
to Krsna consciousness, after many births.
TEXT 7
yoga-yukto visuddhatma
vijitatma jitendriyah
sarva-bhutatma-bhutatma
kurvann api na lipyate
SYNONYMS
yoga-yuktah--engaged in devotional service; visuddha-atma--a purified
soul; vijita-atma--self-controlled; jita-indriyah--having conquered the
senses; sarva-bhuta--to all living entities; atma-bhuta-atma--
compassionate; kurvan api--although engaged in work; na--never;
lipyate--is entangled.
TRANSLATION
One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his
mind and senses is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him.
Though always working, such a man is never entangled.
PURPORT
One who is on the path of liberation by Krsna consciousness is very
dear to every living being, and every living being is dear to him. This
is due to his Krsna consciousness. Such a person cannot think of any
living being as separate from Krsna, just as the leaves and branches of
a tree are not separate from the tree. He knows very well that by
pouring water on the root of the tree, the water will be distributed to
all the leaves and branches, or by supplying food to the stomach, the
energy is automatically distributed throughout the body. Because one
who works in Krsna consciousness is servant to all, he is very dear to
everyone. And because everyone is satisfied by his work, he is pure in
consciousness. Because he is pure in consciousness, his mind is
completely controlled. And because his mind is controlled, his senses
are also controlled. Because his mind is always fixed on Krsna, there
is no chance of his being deviated from Krsna. Nor is there a chance
that he will engage his senses in matters other than the service of the
Lord. He does not like to hear anything except topics relating to
Krsna; he does not like to eat anything which is not offered to Krsna;
and he does not wish to go anywhere if Krsna is not involved.
Therefore, his senses are controlled. A man of controlled senses cannot
be offensive to anyone. One may ask, "Why then was Arjuna offensive (in
battle) to others? Wasn't he in Krsna consciousness?" Arjuna was only
superficially offensive because (as has already been explained in the
Second Chapter) all the assembled persons on the battlefield would
continue to live individually, as the soul cannot be slain. So,
spiritually, no one was killed on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra. Only
their dresses were changed by the order of Krsna, who was personally
present. Therefore Arjuna, while fighting on the Battlefield of
Kuruksetra, was not really fighting at all; he was simply carrying out
the orders of Krsna in full Krsna consciousness. Such a person is never
entangled in the reactions of work.
TEXTS 8-9
naiva kincit karomiti
yukto manyeta tattva-vit
pasyan srnvan sprsan jighrann
asnan gacchan svapan svasan
pralapan visrjan grhnann
unmisan nimisann api
indriyanindriyarthesu
vartanta iti dharayan
SYNONYMS
na--never; eva--certainly; kincit--anything; karomi--I do; iti--thus;
yuktah--engaged in the divine consciousness; manyeta--thinks; tattva-
vit--one who knows the truth; pasyan--seeing; srnvan--hearing; sprsan--
touching; jighran--smelling; asnan--eating; gacchan--going; svapan--
dreaming; svasan--breathing; pralapan--talking; visrjan--giving up;
grhnan--accepting; unmisan--opening; nimisan--closing; api--in spite
of; indriyani--the senses; indriya-arthesu--in sense gratification;
vartante--let them be so engaged; iti--thus; dharayan--considering.
TRANSLATION
A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing,
hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping and
breathing, always knows within himself that he actually does nothing at
all. Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, opening or closing
his eyes, he always knows that only the material senses are engaged
with their objects and that he is aloof from them.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness is pure in his existence, and
consequently he has nothing to do with any work which depends upon five
immediate and remote causes, the doer, the work, the situation, the
endeavor and fortune. This is because he is engaged in the loving
transcendental service of Krsna. Although he appears to be acting with
his body and senses, he is always conscious of his actual position,
which is spiritual engagement. In material consciousness, the senses
are engaged in sense gratification, but in Krsna consciousness the
senses are engaged in the satisfaction of Krsna's senses. Therefore,
the Krsna conscious person is always free, even though he appears to be
engaged in things of the senses. Activities such as seeing, hearing,
speaking, evacuating, etc., are actions of the senses meant for work. A
Krsna conscious person is never affected by the actions of the senses.
He cannot perform any act except in the service of the Lord because he
knows that he is the eternal servitor of the Lord.
TEXT 10
brahmany adhaya karmani
sangam tyaktva karoti yah
lipyate na sa papena
padma-patram ivambhasa
SYNONYMS
brahmani--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhaya--resigning unto;
karmani--all works; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; karoti--
performs; yah--who; lipyate--is affected; na--never; sah--he; papena--
by sin; padma-patram--lotus leaf; iva--like; ambhasa--in the water.
TRANSLATION
One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the results
unto the Supreme God, is not affected by sinful action, as the lotus
leaf is untouched by water.
PURPORT
Here brahmani means in Krsna consciousness. The material world is a sum
total manifestation of the three modes of material nature, technically
called the pradhana. The Vedic hymns sarvam hy etad brahma (Mandukya
Upanisad 2), tasmad etad brahma nama-rupam annam ca jayate (Mundaka
Upanisad 1.2.10), and, in the Bhagavad-gita (14.3), mama yonir mahad
brahma, indicate that everything in the material world is the
manifestation of Brahman; and, although the effects are differently
manifested, they are nondifferent from the cause. In the Isopanisad it
is said that everything is related to the Supreme Brahman, or Krsna,
and thus everything belongs to Him only. One who knows perfectly well
that everything belongs to Krsna, that He is the proprietor of
everything and that, therefore, everything is engaged in the service of
the Lord, naturally has nothing to do with the results of his
activities, whether virtuous or sinful. Even one's material body, being
a gift of the Lord for carrying out a particular type of action, can be
engaged in Krsna consciousness. It is beyond contamination by sinful
reactions, exactly as the lotus leaf, though remaining in the water, is
not wet. The Lord also says in the Gita (3.30), mayi sarvani karmani
sannyasya: "Resign all works unto Me [Krsna]." The conclusion is that a
person without Krsna consciousness acts according to the concept of the
material body and senses, but a person in Krsna consciousness acts
according to the knowledge that the body is the property of Krsna and
should therefore be engaged in the service of Krsna.
TEXT 11
kayena manasa buddhya
kevalair indriyair api
yoginah karma kurvanti
sangam tyaktvatma-suddhaye
SYNONYMS
kayena--with the body; manasa--with the mind; buddhya--with the
intelligence; kevalaih--purified; indriyaih--with the senses; api--even
with; yoginah--Krsna conscious persons; karma--actions; kurvanti--they
act; sangam--attachment; tyaktva--giving up; atma--self; suddhaye--for
the purpose of purification.
TRANSLATION
The yogis, abandoning attachment, act with body, mind, intelligence,
and even with the senses, only for the purpose of purification.
PURPORT
By acting in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of the senses of
Krsna, any action, whether of the body, mind, intelligence or even the
senses, is purified of material contamination. There are no material
reactions resulting from the activities of a Krsna conscious person.
Therefore, purified activities, which are generally called sad-acara,
can be easily performed by acting in Krsna consciousness. Sri Rupa
Gosvami in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.187) describes this as
follows:
iha yasya harer dasye
karmana manasa gira
nikhilasv apy avasthasu
jivan-muktah sa ucyate
"A person acting in Krsna consciousness (or, in other words, in the
service of Krsna) with his body, mind, intelligence and words is a
liberated person even within the material world, although he may be
engaged in many so-called material activities." He has no false ego,
nor does he believe that he is this material body, nor that he
possesses the body. He knows that he is not this body and that this
body does not belong to him. He himself belongs to Krsna, and the body
too belongs to Krsna. When he applies everything produced of the body,
mind, intelligence, words, life, wealth, etc.--whatever he may have
within his possession--to Krsna's service, he is at once dovetailed
with Krsna. He is one with Krsna and is devoid of the false ego that
leads one to believe that he is the body, etc. This is the perfect
stage of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 12
yuktah karma-phalam tyaktva
santim apnoti naisthikim
ayuktah kama-karena
phale sakto nibadhyate
SYNONYMS
yuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; karma-phalam--the
results of all activities; tyaktva--giving up; santim--perfect peace;
apnoti--achieves; naisthikim--unflinching; ayuktah--one who is not in
Krsna consciousness; kama-karena--for enjoying the result of work;
phale--in the result; saktah--attached; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
The steadily devoted soul attains unadulterated peace because he offers
the result of all activities to Me; whereas a person who is not in
union with the Divine, who is greedy for the fruits of his labor,
becomes entangled.
PURPORT
The difference between a person in Krsna consciousness and a person in
bodily consciousness is that the former is attached to Krsna whereas
the latter is attached to the results of his activities. The person who
is attached to Krsna and works for Him only is certainly a liberated
person, and he is not anxious for fruitive rewards. In the Bhagavatam,
the cause of anxiety over the result of an activity is explained as
being one's functioning in the conception of duality, that is, without
knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Krsna is the Supreme Absolute Truth,
the Personality of Godhead. In Krsna consciousness, there is no
duality. All that exists is a product of Krsna's energy, and Krsna is
all good. Therefore, activities in Krsna consciousness are on the
absolute plane; they are transcendental and have no material effect.
One is, therefore, filled with peace in Krsna consciousness. One who
is, however, entangled in profit calculation for sense gratification
cannot have that peace. This is the secret of Krsna consciousness--
realization that there is no existence besides Krsna is the platform of
peace and fearlessness.
TEXT 13
sarva-karmani manasa
sannyasyaste sukham vasi
nava-dvare pure dehi
naiva kurvan na karayan
SYNONYMS
sarva--all; karmani--activities; manasa--by the mind; sannyasya--giving
up; aste--remains; sukham--in happiness; vasi--one who is controlled;
nava-dvare--in the place where there are nine gates; pure--in the city;
dehi--the embodied soul; na--never; eva--certainly; kurvan--doing
anything; na--not; karayan--causing to be done.
TRANSLATION
When the embodied living being controls his nature and mentally
renounces all actions, he resides happily in the city of nine gates
[the material body], neither working nor causing work to be done.
PURPORT
The embodied soul lives in the city of nine gates. The activities of
the body, or the figurative city of body, are conducted automatically
by the particular modes of nature. The soul, although subjecting
himself to the conditions of the body, can be beyond those conditions,
if he so desires. Owing only to forgetfulness of his superior nature,
he identifies with the material body, and therefore suffers. By Krsna
consciousness, he can revive his real position and thus come out of his
embodiment. Therefore, when one takes to Krsna consciousness, one at
once becomes completely aloof from bodily activities. In such a
controlled life, in which his deliberations are changed, he lives
happily within the city of nine gates. The nine gates are described as
follows:
nava-dvare pure dehi
hamso lelayate bahih
vasi sarvasya lokasya
sthavarasya carasya ca
"The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is living within the body of a
living entity, is the controller of all living entities all over the
universe. The body consists of nine gates [two eyes, two nostrils, two
ears, one mouth, the anus and the genitals]. The living entity in his
conditioned stage identifies himself with the body, but when he
identifies himself with the Lord within himself, he becomes just as
free as the Lord, even while in the body." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.18)
Therefore, a Krsna conscious person is free from both the outer and
inner activities of the material body.
TEXT 14
na kartrtvam na karmani
lokasya srjati prabhuh
na karma-phala-samyogam
svabhavas tu pravartate
SYNONYMS
na--never; kartrtvam--proprietorship; na--nor; karmani--activities;
lokasya--of the people; srjati--creates; prabhuh--the master of the
city of the body; na--nor; karma-phala--with the results of activities;
samyogam--connection; svabhavah--the modes of material nature; tu--but;
pravartate--act.
TRANSLATION
The embodied spirit, master of the city of his body, does not create
activities, nor does he induce people to act, nor does he create the
fruits of action. All this is enacted by the modes of material nature.
PURPORT
The living entity, as will be explained in the Seventh Chapter, is one
of the energies or natures of the Supreme Lord but is distinct from
matter, which is another nature--called inferior--of the Lord. Somehow
the superior nature, the living entity, has been in contact with
material nature since time immemorial. The temporary body or material
dwelling place which he obtains is the cause of varieties of activities
and their resultant reactions. Living in such a conditional atmosphere,
one suffers the results of the activities of the body by identifying
himself (in ignorance) with the body. It is ignorance acquired from
time immemorial that is the cause of bodily suffering and distress. As
soon as the living entity becomes aloof from the activities of the
body, he becomes free from the reactions as well. As long as he is in
the city of body, he appears to be the master of it, but actually he is
neither its proprietor nor controller of its actions and reactions. He
is simply in the midst of the material ocean, struggling for existence.
The waves of the ocean are tossing him, and he has no control over
them. His best solution is to get out of the water by transcendental
Krsna consciousness. That alone will save him from all turmoil.
TEXT 15
nadatte kasyacit papam
na caiva sukrtam vibhuh
ajnanenavrtam jnanam
tena muhyanti jantavah
SYNONYMS
na--never; adatte--accepts; kasyacit--anyone's; papam--sin; na--nor;
ca--also; eva--certainly; su-krtam--pious activities; vibhuh--the
Supreme Lord; ajnanena--by ignorance; avrtam--covered; jnanam--
knowledge; tena--by that; muhyanti--are bewildered; jantavah--the
living entities.
TRANSLATION
Nor does the Supreme Lord assume anyone's sinful or pious activities.
Embodied beings, however, are bewildered because of the ignorance which
covers their real knowledge.
PURPORT
The Sanskrit word vibhu means the Supreme Lord who is full of unlimited
knowledge, riches, strength, fame, beauty and renunciation. He is
always satisfied in Himself, undisturbed by sinful or pious activities.
He does not create a particular situation for any living entity, but
the living entity, bewildered by ignorance, desires to be put into
certain conditions of life, and thereby his chain of action and
reaction begins. A living entity is, by superior nature, full of
knowledge. Nevertheless, he is prone to be influenced by ignorance due
to his limited power. The Lord is omnipotent, but the living entity is
not. The Lord is vibhu, or omniscient, but the living entity is anu, or
atomic. Because he is a living soul, he has the capacity to desire by
his free will. Such desire is fulfilled only by the omnipotent Lord.
And so, when the living entity is bewildered in his desires, the Lord
allows him to fulfill those desires, but the Lord is never responsible
for the actions and reactions of the particular situation which may be
desired. Being in a bewildered condition, therefore, the embodied soul
identifies himself with the circumstantial material body and becomes
subjected to the temporary misery and happiness of life. The Lord is
the constant companion of the living entity as Paramatma, or the
Supersoul, and therefore He can understand the desires of the
individual soul, as one can smell the flavor of a flower by being near
it. Desire is a subtle form of conditioning for the living entity. The
Lord fulfills his desire as he deserves: Man proposes and God disposes.
The individual is not, therefore, omnipotent in fulfilling his desires.
The Lord, however, can fulfill all desires, and the Lord, being neutral
to everyone, does not interfere with the desires of the minute
independent living entities. However, when one desires Krsna, the Lord
takes special care and encourages one to desire in such a way that one
can attain to Him and be eternally happy. The Vedic hymns therefore
declare:
esa u hy eva sadhu karma karayati tam yam ebhyo lokebhya unninisate.
esa u evasadhu karma karayati yam adho ninisate
"The Lord engages the living entity in pious activities so that he may
be elevated. The Lord engages him in impious activities so that he may
go to hell." (Kausitaki Upanisad 3.8)
ajno jantur aniso 'yam
atmanah sukha-duhkhayoh
isvara-prerito gacchet
svargam vasv abhram eva ca
"The living entity is completely dependent in his distress and
happiness. By the will of the Supreme he can go to heaven or hell, as a
cloud is driven by the air."
Therefore the embodied soul, by his immemorial desire to avoid Krsna
consciousness, causes his own bewilderment. Consequently, although he
is constitutionally eternal, blissful and cognizant, due to the
littleness of his existence he forgets his constitutional position of
service to the Lord and is thus entrapped by nescience. And, under the
spell of ignorance, the living entity claims that the Lord is
responsible for his conditional existence. The Vedanta-sutras (2.1.34)
also confirm this. Vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat tatha hi
darsayati: "The Lord neither hates nor likes anyone, though He appears
to."
TEXT 16
jnanena tu tad ajnanam
yesam nasitam atmanah
tesam aditya-vaj jnanam
prakasayati tat param
SYNONYMS
jnanena--by knowledge; tu--but; tat--that; ajnanam--nescience; yesam--
whose; nasitam--is destroyed; atmanah--of the living entity; tesam--
their; aditya-vat--like the rising sun; jnanam--knowledge; prakasayati-
-discloses; tat param--Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
When, however, one is enlightened with the knowledge by which nescience
is destroyed, then his knowledge reveals everything, as the sun lights
up everything in the daytime.
PURPORT
Those who have forgotten Krsna must certainly be bewildered, but those
who are in Krsna consciousness are not bewildered at all. It is stated
in the Bhagavad-gita, sarvam jnana-plavena, jnanagnih sarva-karmani and
na hi jnanena sadrsam. Knowledge is always highly esteemed. And what is
that knowledge? Perfect knowledge is achieved when one surrenders unto
Krsna, as is said in the Seventh Chapter, 19th verse: bahunam janmanam
ante jnanavan mam prapadyate. After passing through many, many births,
when one perfect in knowledge surrenders unto Krsna, or when one
attains Krsna consciousness, then everything is revealed to him, as
everything is revealed by the sun in the daytime. The living entity is
bewildered in so many ways. For instance, when he unceremoniously
thinks himself God, he actually falls into the last snare of nescience.
If a living entity is God, then how can he become bewildered by
nescience? Does God become bewildered by nescience? If so, then
nescience, or Satan, is greater than God. Real knowledge can be
obtained from a person who is in perfect Krsna consciousness.
Therefore, one has to seek out such a bona fide spiritual master and,
under him, learn what Krsna consciousness is, for Krsna consciousness
will certainly drive away all nescience, as the sun drives away
darkness. Even though a person may be in full knowledge that he is not
this body but is transcendental to the body, he still may not be able
to discriminate between the soul and the Supersoul. However, he can
know everything well if he cares to take shelter of the perfect, bona
fide Krsna conscious spiritual master. One can know God and one's
relationship with God only when one actually meets a representative of
God. A representative of God never claims that he is God, although he
is paid all the respect ordinarily paid to God because he has knowledge
of God. One has to learn the distinction between God and the living
entity. Lord Sri Krsna therefore stated in the Second Chapter (2.12)
that every living being is individual and that the Lord also is
individual. They were all individuals in the past, they are individuals
at present, and they will continue to be individuals in the future,
even after liberation. At night we see everything as one in the
darkness, but in day, when the sun is up, we see everything in its real
identity. Identity with individuality in spiritual life is real
knowledge.
TEXT 17
tad-buddhayas tad-atmanas
tan-nisthas tat-parayanah
gacchanty apunar-avrttim
jnana-nirdhuta-kalmasah
SYNONYMS
tat-buddhayah--one whose intelligence is always in the Supreme; tat-
atmanah--one whose mind is always in the Supreme; tat-nisthah--whose
mind is only meant for the Supreme; tat-parayanah--who has completely
taken shelter of Him; gacchanti--go; apunah-avrttim--liberation; jnana-
-knowledge; nirdhuta--cleanses; kalmasah--misgivings.
TRANSLATION
When one's intelligence, mind, faith and refuge are all fixed in the
Supreme, then one becomes fully cleansed of misgivings through complete
knowledge and thus proceeds straight on the path of liberation.
PURPORT
The Supreme Transcendental Truth is Lord Krsna. The whole Bhagavad-gita
centers around the declaration that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. That is the version of all Vedic literature. Para-tattva means
the Supreme Reality, who is understood by the knowers of the Supreme as
Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan. Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, is the last word in the Absolute. There is nothing more
than that. The Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat kincid asti
dhananjaya. Impersonal Brahman is also supported by Krsna: brahmano hi
pratisthaham. Therefore in all ways Krsna is the Supreme Reality. One
whose mind, intelligence, faith and refuge are always in Krsna, or, in
other words, one who is fully in Krsna consciousness, is undoubtedly
washed clean of all misgivings and is in perfect knowledge in
everything concerning transcendence. A Krsna conscious person can
thoroughly understand that there is duality (simultaneous identity and
individuality) in Krsna, and, equipped with such transcendental
knowledge, one can make steady progress on the path of liberation.
TEXT 18
vidya-vinaya-sampanne
brahmane gavi hastini
suni caiva sva-pake ca
panditah sama-darsinah
SYNONYMS
vidya--education; vinaya--gentleness; sampanne--fully equipped;
brahmane--in the brahmana; gavi--in the cow; hastini--in the elephant;
suni--in the dog; ca--and; eva--certainly; sva-pake--in the dog-eater
(the outcaste); ca--respectively; panditah--those who are so wise;
sama-darsinah--do see with equal vision.
TRANSLATION
The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal vision a
learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater
[outcaste].
PURPORT
A Krsna conscious person does not make any distinction between species
or castes. The brahmana and the outcaste may be different from the
social point of view, or a dog, a cow, and an elephant may be different
from the point of view of species, but these differences of body are
meaningless from the viewpoint of a learned transcendentalist. This is
due to their relationship to the Supreme, for the Supreme Lord, by His
plenary portion as Paramatma, is present in everyone's heart. Such an
understanding of the Supreme is real knowledge. As far as the bodies
are concerned in different castes or different species of life, the
Lord is equally kind to everyone because He treats every living being
as a friend yet maintains Himself as Paramatma regardless of the
circumstances of the living entities. The Lord as Paramatma is present
in both the outcaste and in the brahmana, although the body of a
brahmana and that of an outcaste are not the same. The bodies are
material productions of different modes of material nature, but the
soul and the Supersoul within the body are of the same spiritual
quality. The similarity in the quality of the soul and the Supersoul,
however, does not make them equal in quantity, for the individual soul
is present only in that particular body whereas the Paramatma is
present in each and every body. A Krsna conscious person has full
knowledge of this, and therefore he is truly learned and has equal
vision. The similar characteristics of the soul and the Supersoul are
that they are both conscious, eternal and blissful. But the difference
is that the individual soul is conscious within the limited
jurisdiction of the body whereas the Supersoul is conscious of all
bodies. The Supersoul is present in all bodies without distinction.
TEXT 19
ihaiva tair jitah sargo
yesam samye sthitam manah
nirdosam hi samam brahma
tasmad brahmani te sthitah
SYNONYMS
iha--in this life; eva--certainly; taih--by them; jitah--conquered;
sargah--birth and death; yesam--of those; samye--in equanimity;
sthitam--so situated; manah--mind; nirdosam--flawless; hi--certainly;
samam--in equanimity; brahma--the Supreme; tasmat--therefore; brahmani-
-in the Supreme; te--they; sthitah--are situated.
TRANSLATION
Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity have
already conquered the conditions of birth and death. They are flawless
like Brahman, and thus they are already situated in Brahman.
PURPORT
Equanimity of mind, as mentioned above, is the sign of self-
realization. Those who have actually attained to such a stage should be
considered to have conquered material conditions, specifically birth
and death. As long as one identifies with this body, he is considered a
conditioned soul, but as soon as he is elevated to the stage of
equanimity through realization of self, he is liberated from
conditional life. In other words, he is no longer subject to take birth
in the material world but can enter into the spiritual sky after his
death. The Lord is flawless because He is without attraction or hatred.
Similarly, when a living entity is without attraction or hatred, he
also becomes flawless and eligible to enter into the spiritual sky.
Such persons are to be considered already liberated, and their symptoms
are described below.
TEXT 20
na prahrsyet priyam prapya
nodvijet prapya capriyam
sthira-buddhir asammudho
brahma-vid brahmani sthitah
SYNONYMS
na--never; prahrsyet--rejoice; priyam--pleasant; prapya--achieving; na-
-does not; udvijet--agitated; prapya--obtaining; ca--also; apriyam--
unpleasant; sthira-buddhih--self-intelligent; asammudhah--unbewildered;
brahma-vit--one who knows the Supreme perfectly; brahmani--in the
transcendence; sthitah--situated.
TRANSLATION
A person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant nor
laments upon obtaining something unpleasant, who is self-intelligent,
unbewildered, and who knows the science of God, is to be understood as
already situated in transcendence.
PURPORT
The symptoms of the self-realized person are given herein. The first
symptom is that he is not illusioned by the false identification of the
body with his true self. He knows perfectly well that he is not this
body, but is the fragmental portion of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is therefore not joyful in achieving something, nor does he
lament in losing anything which is related to his body. This steadiness
of mind is called sthira-buddhi, or self-intelligence. He is therefore
never bewildered by mistaking the gross body for the soul, nor does he
accept the body as permanent and disregard the existence of the soul.
This knowledge elevates him to the station of knowing the complete
science of the Absolute Truth, namely Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan.
He thus knows his constitutional position perfectly well, without
falsely trying to become one with the Supreme in all respects. This is
called Brahman realization, or self-realization. Such steady
consciousness is called Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 21
bahya-sparsesv asaktatma
vindaty atmani yat sukham
sa brahma-yoga-yuktatma
sukham aksayam asnute
SYNONYMS
bahya-sparsesu--in external sense pleasure; asakta-atma--one who is not
so attached; vindati--enjoys; atmani--in the self; yat--that which;
sukham--happiness; sah--that; brahma-yoga--concentrated in Brahman;
yukta-atma--self-connected; sukham--happiness; aksayam--unlimited;
asnute--enjoys.
TRANSLATION
Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure or
external objects but is always in trance, enjoying the pleasure within.
In this way the self-realized person enjoys unlimited happiness, for he
concentrates on the Supreme.
PURPORT
Sri Yamunacarya, a great devotee in Krsna consciousness, said:
yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asit
tad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamane
bhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca
"Since I have been engaged in the transcendental loving service of
Krsna, realizing ever-new pleasure in Him, whenever I think of sex
pleasure, I spit at the thought, and my lips curl with distaste." A
person in brahma-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, is so absorbed in the
loving service of the Lord that he loses his taste for material sense
pleasure altogether. The highest pleasure in terms of matter is sex
pleasure. The whole world is moving under its spell, and a materialist
cannot work at all without this motivation. But a person engaged in
Krsna consciousness can work with greater vigor without sex pleasure,
which he avoids. That is the test in spiritual realization. Spiritual
realization and sex pleasure go ill together. A Krsna conscious person
is not attracted to any kind of sense pleasure due to his being a
liberated soul.
TEXT 22
ye hi samsparsa-ja bhoga
duhkha-yonaya eva te
ady-antavantah kaunteya
na tesu ramate budhah
SYNONYMS
ye--those; hi--certainly; samsparsa-jah--by contact with the material
senses; bhogah--enjoyments; duhkha--distress; yonayah--sources of; eva-
-certainly; te--they are; adi--beginning; anta--end; vantah--subject
to; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; na--never; tesu--in those; ramate--takes
delight; budhah--the intelligent person.
TRANSLATION
An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery,
which are due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunti, such
pleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man does not
delight in them.
PURPORT
Material sense pleasures are due to the contact of the material senses,
which are all temporary because the body itself is temporary. A
liberated soul is not interested in anything which is temporary.
Knowing well the joys of transcendental pleasures, how can a liberated
soul agree to enjoy false pleasure? In the Padma Purana it is said:
ramante yogino 'nante
satyanande cid-atmani
iti rama-padenasau
param brahmabhidhiyate
"The mystics derive unlimited transcendental pleasures from the
Absolute Truth, and therefore the Supreme Absolute Truth, the
Personality of Godhead, is also known as Rama."
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also (5.5.1) it is said:
nayam deho deha-bhajam nr-loke
kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam ye
tapo divyam putraka yena sattvam
suddhyed yasmad brahma-saukhyam tv anantam
"My dear sons, there is no reason to labor very hard for sense pleasure
while in this human form of life; such pleasures are available to the
stool-eaters [hogs]. Rather, you should undergo penances in this life
by which your existence will be purified, and, as a result, you will be
able to enjoy unlimited transcendental bliss."
Therefore, those who are true yogis or learned transcendentalists are
not attracted by sense pleasures, which are the causes of continuous
material existence. The more one is addicted to material pleasures, the
more he is entrapped by material miseries.
TEXT 23
saknotihaiva yah sodhum
prak sarira-vimoksanat
kama-krodhodbhavam vegam
sa yuktah sa sukhi narah
SYNONYMS
saknoti--able to do; iha eva--in the present body; yah--one who;
sodhum--to tolerate; prak--before; sarira--body; vimoksanat--give up;
kama--desire; krodha--anger; udbhavam--generated from; vegam--urge;
sah--he; yuktah--in trance; sah--he; sukhi--happy; narah--human being.
TRANSLATION
Before giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the
urges of the material senses and check the force of desire and anger,
he is a yogi and is happy in this world.
PURPORT
If one wants to make steady progress on the path of self-realization,
he must try to control the forces of the material senses. There are the
forces of talk, forces of anger, forces of mind, forces of the stomach,
forces of the genitals, and forces of the tongue. One who is able to
control the forces of all these different senses, and the mind, is
called gosvami, or svami. Such gosvamis live strictly controlled lives,
and forgo altogether the forces of the senses. Material desires, when
unsatiated, generate anger, and thus the mind, eyes and chest become
agitated. Therefore, one must practice to control them before one gives
up this material body. One who can do this is understood to be self-
realized and is thus happy in the state of self-realization. It is the
duty of the transcendentalist to try strenuously to control desire and
anger.
TEXT 24
yo 'ntah-sukho 'ntar-aramas
tathantar-jyotir eva yah
sa yogi brahma-nirvanam
brahma-bhuto 'dhigacchati
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; antah-sukhah--happy from within; antah-aramah--active
within; tatha--as well as; antah-jyotih--aiming within; eva--certainly;
yah--anyone; sah--he; yogi--mystic; brahma-nirvanam--liberated in the
Supreme; brahma-bhutah--self-realized; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATION
One whose happiness is within, who is active within, who rejoices
within and is illumined within, is actually the perfect mystic. He is
liberated in the Supreme, and ultimately he attains the Supreme.
PURPORT
Unless one is able to relish happiness from within, how can one retire
from the external engagements meant for deriving superficial happiness?
A liberated person enjoys happiness by factual experience. He can,
therefore, sit silently at any place and enjoy the activities of life
from within. Such a liberated person no longer desires external
material happiness. This state is called brahma-bhuta, attaining which
one is assured of going back to Godhead, back to home.
TEXT 25
labhante brahma-nirvanam
rsayah ksina-kalmasah
chinna-dvaidha yatatmanah
sarva-bhuta-hite ratah
SYNONYMS
labhante--achieve; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; rsayah--
those who are active within; ksina-kalmasah--who are devoid of all
sins; chinna--torn off; dvaidhah--duality; yata-atmanah--engaged in
self-realization; sarva-bhuta--in all living entities; hite--in welfare
work; ratah--engaged.
TRANSLATION
One who is beyond duality and doubt, whose mind is engaged within, who
is always busy working for the welfare of all sentient beings, and who
is free from all sins, achieves liberation in the Supreme.
PURPORT
Only a person who is fully in Krsna consciousness can be said to be
engaged in welfare work for all living entities. When a person is
actually in the knowledge that Krsna is the fountainhead of everything,
then when he acts in that spirit he acts for everyone. The sufferings
of humanity are due to forgetfulness of Krsna as the supreme enjoyer,
the supreme proprietor, and the supreme friend. Therefore, to act to
revive this consciousness within the entire human society is the
highest welfare work. One cannot be engaged in first-class welfare work
without being liberated in the Supreme. A Krsna conscious person has no
doubt about the supremacy of Krsna. He has no doubt because he is
completely freed from all sins. This is the state of divine love.
A person engaged only in ministering to the physical welfare of human
society cannot factually help anyone. Temporary relief of the external
body and the mind is not satisfactory. The real cause of one's
difficulties in the hard struggle for life may be found in one's
forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Lord. When a man is
fully conscious of his relationship with Krsna, he is actually a
liberated soul, although he may be in the material tabernacle.
TEXT 26
kama-krodha-vimuktanam
yatinam yata-cetasam
abhito brahma-nirvanam
vartate viditatmanam
SYNONYMS
kama--desires; krodha--anger; vimuktanam--of those who are so
liberated; yatinam--of the saintly persons; yata-cetasam--of persons
who have full control over the mind; abhitah--assured in the near
future; brahma-nirvanam--liberation in the Supreme; vartate--is there;
vidita-atmanam--of those who are self-realized.
TRANSLATION
Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self-
realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection,
are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future.
PURPORT
Of the saintly persons who are constantly engaged in striving toward
salvation, one who is in Krsna consciousness is the best of all. The
Bhagavatam (4.22.39) confirms this fact as follows:
yat-pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya
karmasayam grathitam udgrathayanti santah
tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo 'pi ruddha-
sroto-ganas tam aranam bhaja vasudevam
"Just try to worship, in devotional service, Vasudeva, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even great sages are not able to control the
forces of the senses as effectively as those who are engaged in
transcendental bliss by serving the lotus feet of the Lord, uprooting
the deep grown desire for fruitive activities."
In the conditioned soul the desire to enjoy the fruitive results of
work is so deep-rooted that it is very difficult even for the great
sages to control such desires, despite great endeavors. A devotee of
the Lord, constantly engaged in devotional service in Krsna
consciousness, perfect in self-realization, very quickly attains
liberation in the Supreme. Owing to his complete knowledge in self-
realization, he always remains in trance. To cite an analogous example
of this:
darsana-dhyana-samsparsair
matsya-kurma-vihangamah
svany apatyani pusnanti
tathaham api padma-ja
"By vision, by meditation and by touch only do the fish, the tortoise
and the birds maintain their offspring. Similarly do I also, O
Padmaja!"
The fish brings up its offspring simply by looking at them. The
tortoise brings up its offspring simply by meditation. The eggs of the
tortoise are laid on land, and the tortoise meditates on the eggs while
in the water. Similarly, a devotee in Krsna consciousness, although far
away from the Lord's abode, can elevate himself to that abode simply by
thinking of Him constantly--by engagement in Krsna consciousness. He
does not feel the pangs of material miseries; this state of life is
called brahma-nirvana, or the absence of material miseries due to being
constantly immersed in the Supreme.
TEXTS 27-28
sparsan krtva bahir bahyams
caksus caivantare bhruvoh
pranapanau samau krtva
nasabhyantara-carinau
yatendriya-mano-buddhir
munir moksa-parayanah
vigateccha-bhaya-krodho
yah sada mukta eva sah
SYNONYMS
sparsan--external sense objects, such as sound, etc.; krtva--keeping;
bahih--external; bahyan--unnecessary; caksuh--eyes; ca--also; eva--
certainly; antare--within; bhruvoh--of the eyebrows; prana-apanau--up-
and down-moving air; samau--in suspension; krtva--doing so; nasa-
abhyantara--within the nostrils; carinau--blowing; yata--controlled;
indriya--senses; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; munih--the
transcendentalist; moksa--liberation; parayanah--being so destined;
vigata--discarded; iccha--wishes; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; yah--one
who; sada--always; muktah--liberated; eva--certainly; sah--he is.
TRANSLATION
Shutting out all external sense objects, keeping the eyes and vision
concentrated between the two eyebrows, suspending the inward and
outward breaths within the nostrils--thus controlling the mind, senses
and intelligence, the transcendentalist becomes free from desire, fear
and anger. One who is always in this state is certainly liberated.
PURPORT
Being engaged in Krsna consciousness, one can immediately understand
one's spiritual identity, and then one can understand the Supreme Lord
by means of devotional service. When he is well situated in devotional
service, one comes to the transcendental position, qualified to feel
the presence of the Lord in the sphere of one's activity. This
particular position is called liberation in the Supreme.
After explaining the above principles of liberation in the Supreme, the
Lord gives instruction to Arjuna as to how one can come to that
position by the practice of the mysticism or yoga, known as astanga-
yoga, which is divisible into an eightfold procedure called yama,
niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. In
the Sixth Chapter the subject of yoga is explicitly detailed, and at
the end of the Fifth it is only preliminarily explained. One has to
drive out the sense objects such as sound, touch, form, taste and smell
by the pratyahara (breathing) process in yoga, and then keep the vision
of the eyes between the two eyebrows and concentrate on the tip of the
nose with half closed lids. There is no benefit in closing the eyes
altogether, because then there is every chance of falling asleep. Nor
is there benefit in opening the eyes completely, because then there is
the hazard of being attracted by sense objects. The breathing movement
is restrained within the nostrils by neutralizing the up- and down-
moving air within the body. By practice of such yoga one is able to
gain control over the senses, refrain from outward sense objects, and
thus prepare oneself for liberation in the Supreme.
This yoga process helps one become free from all kinds of fear and
anger and thus feel the presence of the Supersoul in the transcendental
situation. In other words, Krsna consciousness is the easiest process
of executing yoga principles. This will be thoroughly explained in the
next chapter. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always engaged
in devotional service, does not risk losing his senses to some other
engagement. This is a better way of controlling the senses than by the
astanga-yoga.
TEXT 29
bhoktaram yajna-tapasam
sarva-loka-mahesvaram
suhrdam sarva-bhutanam
jnatva mam santim rcchati
SYNONYMS
bhoktaram--beneficiary; yajna--sacrifices; tapasam--of penances and
austerities; sarva-loka--all planets and the demigods thereof; maha-
isvaram--the Supreme Lord; su-hrdam--benefactor; sarva--all; bhutanam--
of the living entities; jnatva--thus knowing; mam--Me (Lord Krsna);
santim--relief from material pangs; rcchati--achieves.
TRANSLATION
The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from
the pangs of material miseries.
PURPORT
The conditioned souls within the clutches of illusory energy are all
anxious to attain peace in the material world. But they do not know the
formula for peace, which is explained in this part of the Bhagavad-
gita. The greatest peace formula is simply this: Lord Krsna is the
beneficiary in all human activities. Men should offer everything to the
transcendental service of the Lord because He is the proprietor of all
planets and the demigods thereon. No one is greater than He. He is
greater than the greatest of the demigods, Lord Siva and Lord Brahma.
In the Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.7) the Supreme Lord is described
as tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram. Under the spell of illusion,
living entities are trying to be lords of all they survey, but actually
they are dominated by the material energy of the Lord. The Lord is the
master of material nature, and the conditioned souls are under the
stringent rules of material nature. Unless one understands these bare
facts, it is not possible to achieve peace in the world either
individually or collectively. This is the sense of Krsna consciousness:
Lord Krsna is the supreme predominator, and all living entities,
including the great demigods, are His subordinates. One can attain
perfect peace only in complete Krsna consciousness.
This Fifth Chapter is a practical explanation of Krsna consciousness,
generally known as karma-yoga. The question of mental speculation as to
how karma-yoga can give liberation is answered herewith. To work in
Krsna consciousness is to work with the complete knowledge of the Lord
as the predominator. Such work is not different from transcendental
knowledge. Direct Krsna consciousness is bhakti-yoga, and jnana-yoga is
a path leading to bhakti-yoga. Krsna consciousness means to work in
full knowledge of one's relationship with the Supreme Absolute, and the
perfection of this consciousness is full knowledge of Krsna, or the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. A pure soul is the eternal servant of
God as His fragmental part and parcel. He comes into contact with maya
(illusion) due to the desire to lord it over maya, and that is the
cause of his many sufferings. As long as he is in contact with matter,
he has to execute work in terms of material necessities. Krsna
consciousness, however, brings one into spiritual life even while one
is within the jurisdiction of matter, for it is an arousing of
spiritual existence by practice in the material world. The more one is
advanced, the more he is freed from the clutches of matter. The Lord is
not partial toward anyone. Everything depends on one's practical
performance of duties in an effort to control the senses and conquer
the influence of desire and anger. And, attaining Krsna consciousness
by controlling the above-mentioned passions, one remains factually in
the transcendental stage, or brahma-nirvana. The eightfold yoga
mysticism is automatically practiced in Krsna consciousness because the
ultimate purpose is served. There is a gradual process of elevation in
the practice of yama, niyama, asana, pratyahara, dhyana, dharana,
pranayama, and samadhi. But these only preface perfection by devotional
service, which alone can award peace to the human being. It is the
highest perfection of life.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Karma-yoga, or Action in Krsna
Consciousness.