Chapter 14
The Three Modes Of Material Nature
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
param bhuyah pravaksyami
jnananam jnanam uttamam
yaj jnatva munayah sarve
param siddhim ito gatah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; param--
transcendental; bhuyah--again; pravaksyami--I shall speak; jnananam--of
all knowledge; jnanam--knowledge; uttamam--the supreme; yat--which;
jnatva--knowing; munayah--the sages; sarve--all; param--transcendental;
siddhim--perfection; itah--from this world; gatah--attained.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme
wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have
attained the supreme perfection.
PURPORT
From the Seventh Chapter to the end of the Twelfth Chapter, Sri Krsna
in detail reveals the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Now, the Lord Himself is further enlightening Arjuna. If one
understands this chapter through the process of philosophical
speculation, he will come to an understanding of devotional service. In
the Thirteenth Chapter, it was clearly explained that by humbly
developing knowledge one may possibly be freed from material
entanglement. It has also been explained that it is due to association
with the modes of nature that the living entity is entangled in this
material world. Now, in this chapter, the Supreme Personality explains
what those modes of nature are, how they act, how they bind and how
they give liberation. The knowledge explained in this chapter is
proclaimed by the Supreme Lord to be superior to the knowledge given so
far in other chapters. By understanding this knowledge, various great
sages attained perfection and transferred to the spiritual world. The
Lord now explains the same knowledge in a better way. This knowledge is
far, far superior to all other processes of knowledge thus far
explained, and knowing this many attained perfection. Thus it is
expected that one who understands this Fourteenth Chapter will attain
perfection.
TEXT 2
idam jnanam upasritya
mama sadharmyam agatah
sarge 'pi nopajayante
pralaye na vyathanti ca
SYNONYMS
idam--this; jnanam--knowledge; upasritya--taking shelter of; mama--My;
sadharmyam--nature; agatah--attained; sarge api--even in the creation;
na--never; upajayante--comes in; pralaye--in the annihilation; na--nor;
vyathanti--disturbed; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the
transcendental nature, which is like My own nature. Thus established,
one is not born at the time of creation nor disturbed at the time of
dissolution.
PURPORT
After acquiring perfect transcendental knowledge, one acquires
qualitative equality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, becoming
free from the repetition of birth and death. One does not, however,
lose his identity as an individual soul. It is understood from Vedic
literature that the liberated souls who have reached the transcendental
planets of the spiritual sky always look to the lotus feet of the
Supreme Lord, being engaged in His transcendental loving service. So,
even after liberation, the devotees do not lose their individual
identities.
Generally, in the material world, whatever knowledge we get is
contaminated by the three modes of material nature. But knowledge which
is not contaminated by the three modes of nature is called
transcendental knowledge. As soon as one is situated in that
transcendental knowledge, he is on the same platform as that of the
Supreme Person. Those who have no knowledge of the spiritual sky hold
that after being freed from the material activities of the material
form, this spiritual identity becomes formless, without any
variegatedness. However, just as there is material variegatedness in
this world, so, in the spiritual world, there is also variegatedness.
Those in ignorance of this think that spiritual existence is opposed to
material variety. But actually, in the spiritual sky, one attains
spiritual form. There are spiritual activities, and the spiritual
situation is called devotional life. That atmosphere is said to be
uncontaminated and there one is equal in quality with the Supreme Lord.
To obtain such knowledge, one must develop all the spiritual qualities.
One who thus develops the spiritual qualities is not affected either by
the creation or the destruction of the material world.
TEXT 3
mama yonir mahad brahma
tasmin garbham dadhamy aham
sambhavah sarva-bhutanam
tato bhavati bharata
SYNONYMS
mama--My; yonih--source of birth; mahat--the total material existence;
brahma--supreme; tasmin--in that; garbham--pregnancy; dadhami--create;
aham--I; sambhavah--possibility; sarva-bhutanam--of all living
entities; tatah--thereafter; bhavati--becomes; bharata--O son of
Bharata.
TRANSLATION
The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth,
and it is that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of
all living beings, O son of Bharata.
PURPORT
This is an explanation of the world: everything that takes place is due
to the combination of ksetra and ksetra-jna, the body and the spirit
soul. This combination of material nature and the living entity is made
possible by the Supreme God Himself. The mahat-tattva is the total
cause of the total cosmic manifestation, and because in the total
substance of the material cause there are three modes of nature, it is
sometimes called Brahman. The Supreme Personality impregnates that
total substance, and thus innumerable universes become possible. This
total material substance, the mahat-tattva, is described as Brahman in
the Vedic literature (Mundaka Upanisad 1.1.19): tasmad etad brahma
nama-rupam annam ca jayate. Into that Brahman the seeds of the living
entities are impregnated by the Supreme Person. The twenty-four
elements, beginning from earth, water, fire and air, are all material
energy, called mahad brahma, or the great Brahman, the material nature.
As is explained in the Seventh Chapter, beyond this there is another,
superior nature--the living entity. In material nature the superior
nature is mixed by the will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
thereafter all living entities are born of this material nature.
The scorpion lays its eggs in piles of rice, and sometimes it is said
that the scorpion is born out of rice. But the rice is not the cause of
the scorpion. Actually, the eggs were laid by the mother. Similarly,
material nature is not the cause of the birth of the living entities.
The seed is given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and they only
seem to come out as products of material nature. Thus every living
entity, according to his past activities, has a different body, created
by this material nature, and the entity can enjoy or suffer according
to his past deeds. The Lord is the cause of all the manifestations of
living entities in this material world.
TEXT 4
sarva-yonisu kaunteya
murtayah sambhavanti yah
tasam brahma mahad yonir
aham bija-pradah pita
SYNONYMS
sarva-yonisu--in all species of life; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
murtayah--forms; sambhavanti--as they appear; yah--which; tasam--all of
them; brahma--supreme; mahat yonih--the source of birth in the material
substance; aham--Myself; bija-pradah--seed-giving; pita--father.
TRANSLATION
It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are
made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-
giving father.
PURPORT
In this verse it is clearly explained that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, is the original father of all living entities. The
living entities are combinations of the material nature and the
spiritual nature. Such living entities are seen not only on this
planet, but in every planet, even in the highest, where Brahma is
situated. Everywhere there are living entities; within the earth there
are living entities, even within water and within fire. All these
appearances are due to the mother, material nature, and Krsna's seed-
giving process. The purport is that the living entities, being
impregnated in the material world, come out in various forms at the
time of creation according to their past deeds.
TEXT 5
sattvam rajas tama iti
gunah prakrti-sambhavah
nibadhnanti maha-baho
dehe dehinam avyayam
SYNONYMS
sattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of
ignorance; iti--thus; gunah--qualities; prakrti--material nature;
sambhavah--produced of; nibadhnanti--does condition; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; dehe--in this body; dehinam--the living entity;
avyayam--eternal.
TRANSLATION
Material nature consists of the three modes--goodness, passion and
ignorance. When the living entity comes in contact with nature, he
becomes conditioned by these modes.
PURPORT
The living entity, because he is transcendental, has nothing to do with
this material nature. Still, because he has become conditioned by the
material world, he is acting under the spell of the three modes of
material nature. Because living entities have different kinds of
bodies, in terms of the different aspects of nature, they are induced
to act according to that nature. This is the cause of the varieties of
happiness and distress.
TEXT 6
tatra sattvam nirmalatvat
prakasakam anamayam
sukha-sangena badhnati
jnana-sangena canagha
SYNONYMS
tatra--thereafter; sattvam--mode of goodness; nirmalatvat--being purest
in the material world; prakasakam--illuminating; anamayam--without any
sinful reaction; sukha--happiness; sangena--association; badhnati--
conditions; jnana--knowledge; sangena--association; ca--also; anagha--O
sinless one.
TRANSLATION
O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those
situated in that mode develop knowledge, but they  become conditioned
by the concept of happiness.
PURPORT
The living entities conditioned by material nature are of various
types. One is happy, another is very active, and another is helpless.
All these types of psychological manifestations are causes of the
entities' conditioned status in nature. How they are differently
conditioned is explained in this section of Bhagavad-gita. The mode of
goodness is first considered. The effect of developing the mode of
goodness in the material world is that one becomes wiser than those
otherwise conditioned. A man in the mode of goodness is not so much
affected by material miseries, and he has a sense of advancement in
material knowledge. The representative type is the brahmana, who is
supposed to be situated in the mode of goodness. This sense of
happiness is due to understanding that, in the mode of goodness, one is
more or less free from sinful reactions. Actually, in the Vedic
literature it is said that the mode of goodness means greater knowledge
and a greater sense of happiness.
The difficulty here is that when a living entity is situated in the
mode of goodness, he becomes conditioned to feel that he is advanced in
knowledge and is better than others. In this way he becomes
conditioned. The best examples are the scientist and philosopher: each
is very proud of his knowledge, and because they generally improve
their living conditions, they feel a sort of material happiness. This
sense of advanced happiness in conditioned life makes them bound by the
mode of goodness of material nature. As such, they are attracted toward
working in the mode of goodness, and, as long as they have an
attraction for working in that way, they have to take some type of body
in the modes of nature. Thus there is no likelihood of liberation, or
of being transferred to the spiritual world. Repeatedly one may become
a philosopher, a scientist or a poet, and repeatedly become entangled
in the same disadvantages of birth and death. But, due to the illusion
of the material energy, one thinks that that sort of life is pleasant.
TEXT 7
rajo ragatmakam viddhi
trsna-sanga-samudbhavam
tan nibadhnati kaunteya
karma-sangena dehinam
SYNONYMS
rajah--the mode of passion; raga-atmakam--born of desire or lust;
viddhi--know; trsna--with hankering; sanga--association; samudbhavam--
produced of; tat--that; nibadhnati--binds; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
karma-sangena--by association with fruitive activity; dehinam--the
embodied.
TRANSLATION
The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of
Kunti, and because of this the embodied living entity is bound to
material fruitive actions.
PURPORT
The mode of passion is characterized by the attraction between man and
woman. Woman has attraction for man, and man has attraction for woman.
This is called the mode of passion. And, when the mode of passion is
increased, one develops the hankering for material enjoyment. He wants
to enjoy sense gratification. For sense gratification, a man in the
mode of passion wants some honor in society, or in the nation, and he
wants to have a happy family, with nice children, wife, and house.
These are the products of the mode of passion. As long as one is
hankering after these things, he has to work very hard. Therefore it is
clearly stated here that he becomes associated with the fruits of his
activities and thus becomes bound by such activities. In order to
please his wife, children and society and to keep up his prestige, one
has to work. Therefore, the whole material world is more or less in the
mode of passion. Modern civilization is considered to be advanced in
the standards of the mode of passion. Formerly, the advanced condition
was considered to be in the mode of goodness. If there is no liberation
for those in the mode of goodness, what to speak of those who are
entangled in the mode of passion?
TEXT 8
tamas tv ajnana-jam viddhi
mohanam sarva-dehinam
pramadalasya-nidrabhis
tan nibadhnati bharata
SYNONYMS
tamah--mode of ignorance; tu--but; ajnana-jam--products of ignorance;
viddhi--knowing; mohanam--delusion; sarva-dehinam--of all embodied
beings; pramada--madness; alasya--indolence; nidrabhih--sleep; tat--
that; nibadhnati--binds; bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bharata, the mode of darkness causes the delusion of all
living entities. The result of this mode is madness, indolence and
sleep, which bind the conditioned soul.
PURPORT
In this verse the specific application of the word tu is very
significant. This means that the mode of ignorance is a very peculiar
qualification of the embodied soul. This mode of ignorance is just the
opposite of the mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, by
development of knowledge, one can understand what is what, but the mode
of ignorance is just the opposite. Everyone under the spell of the mode
of ignorance becomes mad, and a madman cannot understand what is what.
Instead of making advancement, one becomes degraded. The definition of
the mode of ignorance is stated in the Vedic literature. Vastu-
yathatmya-jnanavarakam viparyaya-jnana-janakam tamah: under the spell
of ignorance, one cannot understand a thing as it is. For example,
everyone can see that his grandfather has died, and therefore he will
also die; man is mortal. The children that he conceives will also die.
So death is sure. Still, people are madly accumulating money and
working very hard all day and night, not caring for the eternal spirit.
This is madness. In their madness, they are very reluctant to make
advancement in spiritual understanding. Such people are very lazy. When
they are invited to associate for spiritual understanding, they are not
much interested. They are not even active like the man who is
controlled by the mode of passion. Thus another symptom of one embedded
in the mode of ignorance is that he sleeps more than is required. Six
hours of sleep is sufficient, but a man in the mode of ignorance sleeps
at least ten or twelve hours a day. Such a man appears to be always
dejected and is addicted to intoxicants and sleeping. These are the
symptoms of a person conditioned by the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 9
sattvam sukhe sanjayati
rajah karmani bharata
jnanam avrtya tu tamah
pramade sanjayaty uta
SYNONYMS
sattvam--mode of goodness; sukhe--in happiness; sanjayati--develops;
rajah--mode of passion; karmani--fruits of activities; bharata--O son
of Bharata; jnanam--knowledge; avrtya--covering; tu--but; tamah--the
mode of ignorance; pramade--in madness; sanjayati--develops; uta--it is
said.
TRANSLATION
The mode of goodness conditions one to happiness, passion conditions
him to fruits of action, and ignorance to madness.
PURPORT
A person in the mode of goodness is satisfied by his work or
intellectual pursuit, just as a philosopher, scientist, or educator may
be engaged in a particular field of knowledge and may be satisfied in
that way. A man in the modes of passion and goodness may be engaged in
fruitive activity, he owns as much as he can and spends for good
causes. Sometimes he tries to open hospitals, give to charity
institutions, etc. These are the signs of one in the mode of passion.
And the mode of ignorance covers knowledge. In the mode of ignorance,
whatever one does is neither good for him nor for anyone.
TEXT 10
rajas tamas cabhibhuya
sattvam bhavati bharata
rajah sattvam tamas caiva
tamah sattvam rajas tatha
SYNONYMS
rajah--mode of passion; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; abhibhuya--
also surpassing; sattvam--mode of goodness; bhavati--becomes prominent;
bharata--O son of Bharata; rajah--mode of passion; sattvam--mode of
goodness; tamah--mode of ignorance; ca--also; eva--like that; tamah--
mode of ignorance; sattvam--mode of goodness; rajah--mode of passion;
tatha--as in this.
TRANSLATION
Sometimes the mode of passion becomes prominent, defeating the mode of
goodness, O son of Bharata. And sometimes the mode of goodness defeats
passion, and at other times the mode of ignorance defeats goodness and
passion. In this way there is always competition for supremacy.
PURPORT
When the mode of passion is prominent, the modes of goodness and
ignorance are defeated. When the mode of goodness is prominent, passion
and ignorance are defeated. And when the mode of ignorance is
prominent, passion and goodness are defeated. This competition is
always going on. Therefore, one who is actually intent on advancing in
Krsna consciousness has to transcend these three modes. The prominence
of some certain mode of nature is manifested in one's dealings, in his
activities, in eating, etc. All this will be explained in later
chapters. But if one wants, he can develop, by practice, the mode of
goodness and thus defeat the modes of ignorance and passion. One can
similarly develop the mode of passion and defeat goodness and
ignorance. Or, one can develop the mode of ignorance and defeat
goodness and passion. Although there are these three modes of material
nature, if one is determined, he can be blessed by the mode of
goodness, and by transcending the mode of goodness he can be situated
in pure goodness, which is called the vasudeva state, a state in which
one can understand the science of God. By the manifestation of
particular activities, it can be understood in what mode of nature one
is situated.
TEXT 11
sarva-dvaresu dehe 'smin
prakasa upajayate
jnanam yada tada vidyad
vivrddham sattvam ity uta
SYNONYMS
sarva-dvaresu--all the gates; dehe asmin--in this body; prakasah--
quality of illumination; upajayate--develops; jnanam--knowledge; yada--
when; tada--at that time; vidyat--must know; vivrddham--increased;
sattvam--the mode of goodness; iti--thus; uta--said.
TRANSLATION
The manifestations of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all
the gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.
PURPORT
There are nine gates in the body: two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the
mouth, the genitals and the anus. In every gate, when the symptom of
goodness is illuminated, it should be understood that one has developed
the mode of goodness. In the mode of goodness, one can see things in
the right position, one can hear things in the right position, and one
can taste things in the right position. One becomes cleansed inside and
outside. In every gate there is development of the symptoms of
happiness, and that is the position of goodness.
TEXT 12
lobhah pravrttir arambhah
karmanam asamah sprha
rajasy etani jayante
vivrddhe bharatarsabha
SYNONYMS
lobhah--greed; pravrttih--hankering; arambhah--endeavor; karmanam--of
activities; asamah--uncontrollable; sprha--desire; rajasi--in the mode
of passion; etani--all this; jayante--develop; vivrddhe--when there is
excess; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the descendants of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O chief of the Bharatas, when there is an increase in the mode of
passion, the symptoms of great attachment, uncontrollable desire,
hankering, and intense endeavor develop.
PURPORT
One in the mode of passion is never satisfied with the position he has
already acquired; he hankers to increase his position. If he wants to
construct a residential house, he tries his best to have a palatial
house, as if he would be able to reside in that house eternally. And he
develops a great hankering for sense gratification. There is no end to
sense gratification. He always wants to remain with his family and in
his house and to continue the process of sense gratification. There is
no cessation of this. All these symptoms should be understood as
characteristic of the mode of passion.
TEXT 13
aprakaso 'pravrttis ca
pramado moha eva ca
tamasy etani jayante
vivrddhe kuru-nandana
SYNONYMS
aprakasah--darkness; apravrttih--inactivity; ca--and; pramadah--
madness; mohah--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--also; tamasi--of the mode
of ignorance; etani--these; jayante--are manifested; vivrddhe--is
developed; kuru-nandana--O son of Kuru.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kuru, when there is an increase in the mode of ignorance,
madness, illusion, inertia and darkness are manifested.
PURPORT
When there is no illumination, knowledge is absent. One in the mode of
ignorance does not work by a regulative principle; he wants to act
whimsically for no purpose. Even though he has the capacity to work, he
makes no endeavor. This is called illusion. Although consciousness is
going on, life is inactive. These are the symptoms of one in the mode
of ignorance.
TEXT 14
yada sattve pravrddhe tu
pralayam yati deha-bhrt
tadottama-vidam lokan
amalan pratipadyate
SYNONYMS
yada--when; sattve--mode of goodness; pravrddhe--in development; tu--
but; pralayam--dissolution; yati--goes; deha-bhrt--embodied; tada--at
that time; uttama-vidam--of the great sages; lokan--the planets;
amalan--pure; pratipadyate--attains.
TRANSLATION
When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher
planets.
PURPORT
One in goodness attains higher planetary systems, like Brahmaloka or
Janoloka, and there enjoys godly happiness. The word amalan is
significant; it means free from the modes of passion and ignorance.
There are impurities in the material world, but the mode of goodness is
the purest form of existence in the material world. There are different
kinds of planets for different kinds of living entities. Those who die
in the mode of goodness are elevated to the planets where great sages
and great devotees live.
TEXT 15
rajasi pralayam gatva
karma-sangisu jayate
tatha pralinas tamasi
mudha-yonisu jayate
SYNONYMS
rajasi--in passion; pralayam--dissolution; gatva--attaining; karma-
sangisu--in the association of fruitive activities; jayate--takes
birth; tatha--thereafter; pralinah--being dissolved; tamasi--in
ignorance; mudha--animal; yonisu--species; jayate--take birth.
TRANSLATION
When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those
engaged in fruitive activities; and when he dies in the mode of
ignorance, he takes birth in the animal kingdom.
PURPORT
Some people have the impression that when the soul reaches the platform
of human life, it never goes down again. This is incorrect. According
to this verse, if one develops the mode of ignorance, after his death
he is degraded to an animal form of life. From there one has to again
elevate himself, by an evolutionary process, to come again to the human
form of life. Therefore, those who are actually serious about human
life should take to the mode of goodness and in good association
transcend the modes and become situated in Krsna consciousness. This is
the aim of human life. Otherwise, there is no guarantee that the human
being will again attain to the human status.
TEXT 16
karmanah sukrtasyahuh
sattvikam nirmalam phalam
rajasas tu phalam duhkham
ajnanam tamasah phalam
SYNONYMS
karmanah--of work; su-krtasya--in the mode of goodness; ahuh--said;
sattvikam--mode of goodness; nirmalam--purified; phalam--result;
rajasah--of the mode of passion; tu--but; phalam--result; duhkham--
misery; ajnanam--nonsense; tamasah--of the mode of ignorance; phalam--
result.
TRANSLATION
By acting in the mode of goodness, one becomes purified. Works done in
the mode of passion result in distress, and actions performed in the
mode of ignorance result in foolishness.
PURPORT
By pious activities in the mode of goodness one is purified; therefore
the sages, who are free from all illusion, are situated in happiness.
Similarly activities in the mode of passion are simply miserable. Any
activity for material happiness is bound to be defeated. If, for
example, one wants to have a skyscraper, so much human misery has to be
undergone before a big skyscraper can be built. The financier has to
take much trouble to earn a mass of wealth, and those who are slaving
to construct the building have to render physical toil. The miseries
are there. Thus Bhagavad-gita says that in any activity performed under
the spell of the mode of passion, there is definitely great misery.
There may be a little so-called mental happiness--"I have this house or
this money"--but this is not actual happiness.
As far as the mode of ignorance is concerned, the performer is without
knowledge, and therefore all his activities result in present misery,
and afterwards he will go on toward animal life. Animal life is always
miserable, although, under the spell of the illusory energy, maya, the
animals do not understand this. Slaughtering poor animals is also due
to the mode of ignorance. The animal killers do not know that in the
future the animal will have a body suitable to kill them. That is the
law of nature. In human society, if one kills a man he has to be
hanged. That is the law of the state. Because of ignorance, people do
not perceive that there is a complete state controlled by the Supreme
Lord. Every living creature is a son of the Supreme Lord, and He does
not tolerate even an ant's being killed. One has to pay for it. So,
indulgence in animal killing for the taste of the tongue is the
grossest kind of ignorance. A human being has no need to kill animals
because God has supplied so many nice things. If one indulges in meat-
eating anyway, it is to be understood that he is acting in ignorance
and is making his future very dark. Of all kinds of animal killing, the
killing of cows is most vicious because the cow gives us all kinds of
pleasure by supplying milk. Cow slaughter is an act of the grossest
type of ignorance. In the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 9.4.64) the words
gobhih prinita-matsaram indicate that one who, being fully satisfied by
milk, is desirous of killing the cow is, in the grossest ignorance.
There is also a prayer in the Vedic literature that states:
namo brahmanya-devaya
go-brahmana-hitaya ca
jagad-dhitaya krsnaya
govindaya namo namah
"My Lord, You are the well-wisher of the cows and the brahmanas, and
You are the well-wisher of the entire human society and world." (Visnu
Purana 1.19.65) The purport is that special mention is given in that
prayer for the protection of the cows and the brahmanas. Brahmanas are
the symbol of spiritual education, and cows are the symbol of the most
valuable food; these two living creatures, the brahmanas and the cows,
must be given all protection--that is real advancement of civilization.
In modern human society, spiritual knowledge is neglected, and cow
killing is encouraged. It is to be understood, then, that human society
is advancing in the wrong direction and is clearing the path to its own
condemnation. A civilization which guides the citizens to become
animals in their next lives is certainly not a human civilization. The
present human civilization is, of course, grossly misled by the modes
of passion and ignorance. It is a very dangerous age, and all nations
should take care to provide the easiest process, Krsna consciousness,
to save humanity from the greatest danger.
TEXT 17
sattvat sanjayate jnanam
rajaso lobha eva ca
pramada-mohau tamaso
bhavato 'jnanam eva ca
SYNONYMS
sattvat--from the mode of goodness; sanjayate--develops; jnanam--
knowledge; rajasah--from the mode of passion; lobhah--greed; eva--
certainly; ca--also; pramada--madness; mohau--illusion; tamasah--from
the mode of ignorance; bhavatah--develops; ajnanam--nonsense; eva--
certainly; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of
passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance develop
foolishness, madness and illusion.
PURPORT
Since the present civilization is not very congenial to the living
entities, Krsna consciousness is recommended. Through Krsna
consciousness, society will develop the mode of goodness. When the mode
of goodness is developed, people will see things as they are. In the
mode of ignorance, people are just like animals and cannot see things
clearly. In the mode of ignorance, for example, they do not see that by
killing one animal they are taking a chance of being killed by the same
animal in the next life. Because people have no education in actual
knowledge, they become irresponsible. To stop this irresponsibility,
education for developing the mode of goodness of the people in general
must be there. When they are actually educated in the mode of goodness,
they will become sober, in full knowledge of things as they are. Then
people will be happy and prosperous. Even if the majority of the people
aren't happy and prosperous, if a certain percentage of the population
develops Krsna consciousness and becomes situated in the mode of
goodness, then there is the possibility for peace and prosperity all
over the world. Otherwise, if the world is devoted to the modes of
passion and ignorance, there can be no peace or prosperity. In the mode
of passion, people become greedy, and their hankering for sense
enjoyment has no limit. One can see that even if one has enough money
and adequate arrangement for sense gratification, there is neither
happiness nor peace of mind. That is not possible because one is
situated in the mode of passion. If one wants happiness at all, his
money will not help him; he has to elevate himself to the mode of
goodness by practicing Krsna consciousness. One engaged in the mode of
passion is not only mentally unhappy, but his profession and occupation
are also very troublesome. He has to devise so many plans and schemes
to acquire enough money to maintain his status quo. This is all
miserable. In the mode of ignorance, people become mad. Being
distressed by their circumstances, they take shelter of intoxication,
and thus they sink further into ignorance. Their future in life is very
dark.
TEXT 18
urdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha
madhye tisthanti rajasah
jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha
adho gacchanti tamasah
SYNONYMS
urdhvam--upwards; gacchanti--go; sattva-sthah--one who is situated in
the mode of goodness; madhye--in the middle; tisthanti--dwell; rajasah-
-those who are situated in the mode of passion; jaghanya--abominable;
guna--quality; vrtti-sthah--occupation; adhah--down; gacchanti--go;
tamasah--people in the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the
higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly
planets; and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish
worlds.
PURPORT
In this verse the results of actions in the three modes of nature are
more explicitly set forth. There is an upper planetary system,
consisting of the heavenly planets, where everyone is highly elevated.
According to the degree of development of the mode of goodness, the
living entity can be transferred to various planets in this system. The
highest planet is Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka, where the prime person of
this universe, Lord Brahma, resides. We have seen already that we can
hardly calculate the wondrous condition of life in Brahmaloka, but the
highest condition of life, the mode of goodness, can bring us to this.
The mode of passion is mixed. It is in the middle, between the modes of
goodness and ignorance. A person is not always pure, but even if he
should be purely in the mode of passion, he will simply remain on this
earth as a king or a rich man. But because there are mixtures, one can
also go down. People on this earth, in the mode of passion or
ignorance, cannot forcibly approach the higher planets by machine. In
the mode of passion, there is also the chance of becoming mad in the
next life.
The lowest quality, the mode of ignorance, is described here as
abominable. The result of developing ignorance is very, very risky. It
is the lowest quality in material nature. Beneath the human level there
are eight million species of life: birds, beasts, reptiles, trees,
etc., and, according to the development of the mode of ignorance,
people are brought down to these abominable conditions. The word
tamasah is very significant here. Tamasah indicates those who stay
continually in the mode of ignorance without rising to a higher mode.
Their future is very dark.
There is an opportunity for men in the modes of ignorance and passion
to be elevated to the mode of goodness, and that system is called Krsna
consciousness. But one who does not take advantage of this opportunity
will certainly continue in the lower modes.
TEXT 19
nanyam gunebhyah kartaram
yada drastanupasyati
gunebhyas ca param vetti
mad-bhavam so 'dhigacchati
SYNONYMS
na--never; anyam--other than; gunebhyah--from the qualities; kartaram--
the performer; yada--when; drasta anupasyati--he who sees properly;
gunebhyah ca--from the modes of nature; param--transcendental; vetti--
know; mat-bhavam--My spiritual nature; sah--he; adhigacchati--is
promoted.
TRANSLATION
When you see that there is nothing beyond these modes of nature in all
activities and that the Supreme Lord is transcendental to all these
modes, then you can know My spiritual nature.
PURPORT
One can transcend all the activities of the modes of material nature
simply by understanding them properly by learning from the proper
souls. The real spiritual master is Krsna, and He is imparting this
spiritual knowledge to Arjuna. Similarly, it is from those who are
fully in Krsna consciousness that one has to learn this science of
activities in terms of the modes of nature. Otherwise, one's life will
be misdirected. By the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, a
living entity can know of his spiritual position, his material body,
his senses, how he is entrapped, and how he is under the spell of the
material modes of nature. He is helpless, being in the grip of these
modes, but when he can see his real position, then he can attain to the
transcendental platform, having the scope for spiritual life. Actually,
the living entity is not the performer of different activities. He is
forced to act because he is situated in a particular type of body,
conducted by some particular mode of material nature. Unless one has
the help of spiritual authority, he cannot understand in what position
he is actually situated. With the association of a bona fide spiritual
master, he can see his real position, and, by such an understanding, he
can become fixed in full Krsna consciousness. A man in Krsna
consciousness is not controlled by the spell of the material modes of
nature. It has already been stated in the Seventh Chapter that one who
has surrendered to Krsna is relieved from the activities of material
nature. Therefore for one who is able to see things as they are, the
influence of material nature gradually ceases.
TEXT 20
gunan etan atitya trin
dehi deha-samudbhavan
janma-mrtyu-jara-duhkhair
vimukto 'mrtam asnute
SYNONYMS
gunan--qualities; etan--all these; atitya--transcending; trin--three;
dehi--embodied; deha--body; samudbhavan--produced of; janma--birth;
mrtyu--death; jara--old age; duhkhaih--distresses; vimuktah--being
freed from; amrtam--nectar; asnute--enjoys.
TRANSLATION
When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes, he can
become free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and can
enjoy nectar even in this life.
PURPORT
How one can stay in the transcendental position, even in this body, in
full Krsna consciousness, is explained in this verse. The Sanskrit word
dehi means "embodied." Although one is within this material body, by
his advancement in spiritual knowledge he can be free from the
influence of the modes of nature. He can enjoy the happiness of
spiritual life even in this body because, after leaving this body, he
is certainly going to the spiritual sky. But even in this body he can
enjoy spiritual happiness. In other words, devotional service in Krsna
consciousness is the sign of liberation from material entanglement, and
this will be explained in the Eighteenth Chapter. When one is freed
from the influence of the modes of material nature, he enters into
devotional service.
TEXT 21
arjuna uvaca
kair lingais trin gunan etan
atito bhavati prabho
kim acarah katham caitams
trin gunan ativartate
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; kaih--by which; lingaih--symptoms; trin--
three; gunan--qualities; etan--all this; atitah--having transcended;
bhavati--become; prabho--my Lord; kim--what; acarah--behavior; katham--
what; ca--also; etan--these; trin--three; gunan--qualities; ativartate-
-transcend.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, by what symptoms is one known who is
transcendental to those modes? What is his behavior? And how does he
transcend the modes of nature?
PURPORT
In this verse, Arjuna's questions are very appropriate. He wants to
know the symptoms of a person who has already transcended the material
modes. He first inquires of the symptoms of such a transcendental
person. How can one understand that he has already transcended the
influence of the modes of material nature? The second question asks how
he lives and what his activities are. Are they regulated or
nonregulated? Then Arjuna inquires of the means by which he can attain
the transcendental nature. That is very important. Unless one knows the
direct means by which one can be situated always transcendentally,
there is no possibility of showing the symptoms. So all these questions
put by Arjuna are very important, and the Lord answers them.
TEXTS 22-25
sri-bhagavan uvaca
prakasam ca pravrttim ca
moham eva ca pandava
na dvesti sampravrttani
na nivrttani kanksati
udasina-vad asino
gunair yo na vicalyate
guna vartanta ity evam
yo 'vatisthati nengate
sama-duhkha-sukhah sva-sthah
sama-lostasma-kancanah
tulya-priyapriyo dhiras
tulya-nindatma-samstutih
manapamanayos tulyas
tulyo mitrari-paksayoh
sarvarambha-parityagi
gunatitah sa ucyate
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prakasam
ca--and illumination; pravrttim ca--and attachment; moham--illusion;
eva ca--also; pandava--O son of Pandu; na dvesti--does not hate;
sampravrttani--although developed; na nivrttani--nor stop development;
kanksati--desires; udasina-vat--as if neutral; asinah--situated;
gunaih--by the qualities; yah--one who; na--never; vicalyate--is
agitated; gunah--the qualities; vartante--is situated; iti evam--
knowing thus; yah--one who; avatisthati--remains; na--never; ingate--
flickering; sama--equal; duhkha--in distress; sukhah--in happiness;
sva-sthah--being situated himself; sama--equally; losta--a lump of
earth; asma--stone; kancanah--gold; tulya--equally disposed; priya--
dear; apriyah--undesirable; dhirah--steady; tulya--equally; ninda--in
defamation; atma-samstutih--in praise of himself; mana--in honor;
apamanayoh--dishonor; tulyah--equally; tulyah--equally; mitra--friend;
ari--enemy; paksayoh--in parties; sarva--all; arambha--endeavor;
parityagi--renouncer; guna-atitah--transcendental to the material modes
of nature; sah--he; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: He who does not hate illumination, attachment
and delusion when they are present, nor longs for them when they
disappear; who is seated like one unconcerned, being situated beyond
these material reactions of the modes of nature, who remains firm,
knowing that the modes alone are active; who regards alike pleasure and
pain, and looks on a lump of earth, a stone and a piece of gold with an
equal eye; who is wise and holds praise and blame to be the same; who
is unchanged in honor and dishonor, who treats friend and foe alike,
who has abandoned all fruitive undertakings--such a man is said to have
transcended the modes of nature.
PURPORT
Arjuna submitted three different questions, and the Lord answers them
one after another. In these verses, Krsna first indicates that a person
transcendentally situated neither envies anyone nor hankers for
anything. When a living entity stays in this material world embodied by
the material body, it is to be understood that he is under the control
of one of the three modes of material nature. When he is actually out
of the body, then he is out of the clutches of the material modes of
nature. But as long as he is not out of the material body, he should be
neutral. He should engage himself in the devotional service of the Lord
so that his identity with the material body will automatically be
forgotten. When one is conscious of the material body, he acts only for
sense gratification, but when one transfers the consciousness to Krsna,
sense gratification automatically stops. One does not need this
material body, and he does not need to accept the dictations of the
material body. The qualities of the material modes in the body will
act, but as spirit soul the self is aloof from such activities. How
does he become aloof? He does not desire to enjoy the body, nor does he
desire to get out of it. Thus transcendentally situated, the devotee
becomes automatically free. He need not try to become free from the
influence of the modes of material nature.
The next question concerns the dealings of a transcendentally situated
person. The materially situated person is affected by so-called honor
and dishonor offered to the body, but the transcendentally situated
person is not affected by such false honor and dishonor. He performs
his duty in Krsna consciousness and does not mind whether a man honors
or dishonors him. He accepts things that are favorable for his duty in
Krsna consciousness, otherwise he has no necessity of anything
material, either a stone or gold. He takes everyone as his dear friend
who helps him in his execution of Krsna consciousness, and he does not
hate his so-called enemy. He is equally disposed and sees everything on
an equal level because he knows perfectly well that he has nothing to
do with material existence. Social and political issues do not affect
him because he knows the situation of temporary upheavals and
disturbances. He does not attempt anything for his own sake. He can
attempt anything for Krsna, but for his personal self he does not
attempt 
anything. 
By 
such 
behavior 
one 
becomes 
actually
transcendentally situated.
TEXT 26
mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
bhakti-yogena sevate
sa gunan samatityaitan
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate
SYNONYMS
mam--unto Me; ca--also; yah--person; avyabhicarena--without fail;
bhakti-yogena--by devotional service; sevate--renders service; sah--he;
gunan--all the modes of material nature; samatitya--transcending; etan-
-all this; brahma-bhuyaya--to be elevated to the Brahman platform;
kalpate--is considered.
TRANSLATION
One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in
any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and
thus comes to the level of Brahman.
PURPORT
This verse is a reply to Arjuna's third question: What is the means of
attaining to the transcendental position? As explained before, the
material world is acting under the spell of the modes of material
nature. One should not be disturbed by the activities of the modes of
nature; instead of putting his consciousness into such activities, he
may transfer his consciousness to Krsna activities. Krsna activities
are known as bhakti-yoga--always acting for Krsna. This includes not
only Krsna, but His different plenary expansions such as Rama and
Narayana. He has innumerable expansions. One who is engaged in the
service of any of the forms of Krsna, or of His plenary expansions, is
considered to be transcendentally situated. One should also note that
all the forms of Krsna are fully transcendental, blissful, full of
knowledge and eternal. Such personalities of Godhead are omnipotent and
omniscient, and they possess all transcendental qualities. So, if one
engages himself in the service of Krsna or His plenary expansions with
unfailing determination, although these modes of material nature are
very difficult to overcome, he can overcome them easily. This has
already been explained in the Seventh Chapter. One who surrenders unto
Krsna at once surmounts the influence of the modes of material nature.
To be in Krsna consciousness or in devotional service means to acquire
equality with Krsna. The Lord says that His nature is eternal, blissful
and full of knowledge, and the living entities are part and parcel of
the Supreme, as gold particles are part of a gold mine. Thus the living
entity's spiritual position is as good as gold, as good as Krsna in
quality. The difference of individuality continues, otherwise there is
no question of bhakti-yoga. Bhakti-yoga means that the Lord is there,
the devotee is there and the activity of exchange of love between the
Lord and the devotee is there. Therefore the individuality of two
persons is present in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
individual person, otherwise there would be no meaning to bhakti-yoga.
If one is not situated in the same transcendental position with the
Lord, one cannot serve the Supreme Lord. To be a personal assistant to
a king, one must acquire the qualifications. Thus the qualification is
to become Brahman, or freed from all material contamination. It is said
in the Vedic literature, brahmaiva san brahmapy eti. One can attain the
Supreme Brahman by becoming Brahman. This means that one must
qualitatively become one with Brahman. By attainment of Brahman, one
does not lose his eternal Brahman identity as an individual soul.
TEXT 27
brahmano hi pratisthaham
amrtasyavyayasya ca
sasvatasya ca dharmasya
sukhasyaikantikasya ca
SYNONYMS
brahmanah--of the impersonal brahmajyoti; hi--certainly; pratistha--the
rest; aham--I am; amrtasya--of the immortal; avyayasya--of the
imperishable; ca--also; sasvatasya--of the eternal; ca--and; dharmasya-
-of the constitutional position; sukhasya--happiness; aikantikasya--
ultimate; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
And I am the basis of impersonal Brahman, which is the constitutional
position of ultimate happiness, and which is immortal, imperishable and
eternal.
PURPORT
The constitution of Brahman is immortality, imperishability, eternity,
and happiness. Brahman is the beginning of transcendental realization.
Paramatma, the Supersoul, is the middle, the second stage in
transcendental realization, and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the ultimate realization of the Absolute Truth. Therefore, both
Paramatma and the impersonal Brahman are within the Supreme Person. It
is explained in the Seventh Chapter that material nature is the
manifestation of the inferior energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord
impregnates the inferior material nature with fragments of the superior
nature, and that is the spiritual touch in the material nature. When a
living entity conditioned by this material nature begins the
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, he elevates himself from the
position of material existence and gradually rises up to the Brahman
conception of the Supreme. This attainment of the Brahman conception of
life is the first stage in self-realization. At this stage the Brahman-
realized person is transcendental to the material position, but he is
not actually perfect in Brahman realization. If he wants, he can
continue to stay in the Brahman position and then gradually rise up to
Paramatma realization and then to the realization of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. There are many examples of this in Vedic
literature. The four Kumaras were situated first in the impersonal
Brahman conception of truth, but then they gradually rose to the
platform of devotional service. One who cannot elevate himself beyond
the impersonal conception of Brahman runs the risk of falling down. In
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that although a person may rise to the
stage of impersonal Brahman, without going further, with no information
of the Supreme Person, his intelligence is not perfectly clear.
Therefore, in spite of being raised to the Brahman platform, there is
the chance of falling down if one is not engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord. In the Vedic language it is also said, raso vai
sah, rasam hy evayam labdhvanandi bhavati: "When one understands the
Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of pleasure, Krsna, he actually
becomes transcendentally blissful." (Taittiriya Upanisad 2.7.1) The
Supreme Lord is full in six opulences, and when a devotee approaches
Him, there is an exchange of these six opulences. The servant of the
king enjoys on an almost equal level with the king. And so, eternal
happiness, imperishable happiness, and eternal life accompany
devotional service. Therefore, realization of Brahman, or eternity, or
imperishability is included in devotional service. This is already
possessed by a person who is engaged in devotional service.
The living entity, although Brahman by nature, has the desire to lord
it over the material world, and due to this he falls down. In his
constitutional position, a living entity is above the three modes of
material nature, but association with material nature entangles him in
the different modes of material nature, goodness, passion and
ignorance. Due to the association of these three modes, his desire to
dominate the material world is there. By engagement in devotional
service in full Krsna consciousness, he is immediately situated in the
transcendental position, and his unlawful desire to control material
nature is removed. Therefore the process of devotional service begins
with hearing, chanting, remembering--the prescribed nine methods for
realizing devotional service--should be practiced in the association of
devotees. Gradually, by such association, by the influence of the
spiritual master, one's material desire to dominate is removed, and one
becomes firmly situated in the Lord's transcendental loving service.
This method is prescribed from the twenty-second to the last verse of
this chapter. Devotional service to the Lord is very simple: one should
always engage in the service of the Lord, should eat the remnants of
foodstuffs offered to the Deity, smell the flowers offered to the lotus
feet of the Lord, see the places where the Lord had His transcendental
pastimes, read of the different activities of the Lord, His
reciprocation of love with His devotees, chant always the
transcendental vibration Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare
Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and observe the
fasting days commemorating the appearances and disappearances of the
Lord and His devotees. By following such a process one becomes
completely detached from all material activities. One who can thus
situate himself in the brahma-jyoti is equal to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead in quality.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Three Modes of Material
Nature.