Chapter 2
Contents of the Gita Summarized
TEXT 1
sanjaya uvaca
tam tatha krpayavistam
asru-purnakuleksanam
visidantam idam vakyam
uvaca madhusudanah
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; tam--unto Arjuna; tatha--thus; krpaya--by
compassion; avistam--overwhelmed; asru-purna--full of tears; akula--
depressed; iksanam--eyes; visidantam--lamenting; idam--this; vakyam--
words; uvaca--said; madhu-sudanah--the killer of Madhu.
TRANSLATION
Sanjaya said: Seeing Arjuna full of compassion and very sorrowful, his
eyes brimming with tears, Madhusudana, Krsna, spoke the following
words.
PURPORT
Material compassion, lamentation and tears are all signs of ignorance
of the real self. Compassion for the eternal soul is self-realization.
The word "Madhusudana" is significant in this verse. Lord Krsna killed
the demon Madhu, and now Arjuna wanted Krsna to kill the demon of
misunderstanding that had overtaken him in the discharge of his duty.
No one knows where compassion should be applied. Compassion for the
dress of a drowning man is senseless. A man fallen in the ocean of
nescience cannot be saved simply by rescuing his outward dress--the
gross material body. One who does not know this and laments for the
outward dress is called a sudra, or one who laments unnecessarily.
Arjuna was a ksatriya, and this conduct was not expected from him. Lord
Krsna, however, can dissipate the lamentation of the ignorant man, and
for this purpose the Bhagavad-gita was sung by Him. This chapter
instructs us in self-realization by an analytical study of the material
body and the spirit soul, as explained by the supreme authority, Lord
Sri Krsna. This realization is made possible by working with the
fruitive being situated in the fixed conception of the real self.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kutas tva kasmalam idam
visame samupasthitam
anarya-justam asvargyam
akirti-karam arjuna
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kutah--
wherefrom; tva--unto you; kasmalam--dirtiness; idam--this lamentation;
visame--in this hour of crisis; samupasthitam--arrived; anarya--persons
who do not know the value of life; justam--practiced by; asvargyam--
that which does not lead to higher planets; akirti--infamy; karam--the
cause of; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Person [Bhagavan] said: My dear Arjuna, how have these
impurities come upon you? They are not at all befitting a man who knows
the progressive values of life. They lead not to higher planets, but to
infamy.
PURPORT
Krsna and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are identical. Therefore
Lord Krsna is referred to as "Bhagavan" throughout the Gita. Bhagavan
is the ultimate in Absolute Truth. Absolute Truth is realized in three
phases of understanding, namely Brahman, or the impersonal all-
pervasive spirit; Paramatma, or the localized aspect of the Supreme
within the heart of all living entities; and Bhagavan, or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11)
this conception of the Absolute Truth is explained thus:
vadanti tat tattva-vidas
tattvam yaj jnanam advayam
brahmeti paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate
"The Absolute Truth is realized in three phases of understanding by the
knower of the Absolute Truth, and all of them are identical. Such
phases of the Absolute Truth are expressed as Brahman, Paramatma, and
Bhagavan."
These three divine aspects can be explained by the example of the sun,
which also has three different aspects, namely the sunshine, the sun's
surface and the sun planet itself. One who studies the sunshine only is
the preliminary student. One who understands the sun's surface is
further advanced. And one who can enter into the sun planet is the
highest. Ordinary students who are satisfied simply by understanding
the sunshine--its universal pervasiveness and the glaring effulgence of
its impersonal nature--may be compared to those who can realize only
the Brahman feature of the Absolute Truth. The student who has advanced
still further can know the sun disc, which is compared to knowledge of
the Paramatma feature of the Absolute Truth. And the student who can
enter into the heart of the sun planet is compared to those who realize
the personal features of the Supreme Absolute Truth. Therefore, the
bhaktas, or the transcendentalists who have realized the Bhagavan
feature of the Absolute Truth, are the topmost transcendentalists,
although all students who are engaged in the study of the Absolute
Truth are engaged in the same subject matter. The sunshine, the sun
disc and the inner affairs of the sun planet cannot be separated from
one another, and yet the students of the three different phases are not
in the same category.
The Sanskrit word bhagavan is explained by the great authority,
Parasara Muni, the father of Vyasadeva. The Supreme Personality who
possesses all riches, all strength, all fame, all beauty, all knowledge
and all renunciation is called Bhagavan. There are many persons who are
very rich, very powerful, very beautiful, very famous, very learned,
and very much detached, but no one can claim that he possesses all
riches, all strength, etc., entirely. Only Krsna can claim this because
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No living entity, including
Brahma, Lord Siva, or Narayana, can possess opulences as fully as
Krsna. Therefore it is concluded in the Brahma-samhita by Lord Brahma
himself that Lord Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No one
is equal to or above Him. He is the primeval Lord, or Bhagavan, known
as Govinda, and He is the supreme cause of all causes:
isvarah paramah krsnah
sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah
anadir adir govindah
sarva-karana-karanam
"There are many personalities possessing the qualities of Bhagavan, but
Krsna is the supreme because none can excel Him. He is the Supreme
Person, and His body is eternal, full of knowledge and bliss. He is the
primeval Lord Govinda and the cause of all causes." (Brahma-samhita
5.1)
In the Bhagavatam also there is a list of many incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, but Krsna is described as the original
Personality of Godhead, from whom many, many incarnations and
Personalities of Godhead expand:
ete camsa-kalah pumsah
krsnas tu bhagavan svayam
indrari-vyakulam lokam
mrdayanti yuge yuge
"All the lists of the incarnations of Godhead submitted herewith are
either plenary expansions or parts of the plenary expansions of the
Supreme Godhead, but Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Himself." (Bhag. 1.3.28)
Therefore, Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Absolute Truth, the source of both the Supersoul and the impersonal
Brahman.
In the presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna's
lamentation for his kinsmen is certainly unbecoming, and therefore
Krsna expressed His surprise with the word kutas, "wherefrom." Such
unmanly sentiments were never expected from a person belonging to the
civilized class of men known as Aryans. The word Aryan is applicable to
persons who know the value of life and have a civilization based on
spiritual realization. Persons who are led by the material conception
of life do not know that the aim of life is realization of the Absolute
Truth, Visnu, or Bhagavan, and they are captivated by the external
features of the material world, and therefore they do not know what
liberation is. Persons who have no knowledge of liberation from
material bondage are called non-Aryans. Although Arjuna was a ksatriya,
he was deviating from his prescribed duties by declining to fight. This
act of cowardice is described as befitting the non-Aryans. Such
deviation from duty does not help one in the progress of spiritual
life, nor does it even give one the opportunity to become famous in
this world. Lord Krsna did not approve of the so-called compassion of
Arjuna for his kinsmen.
TEXT 3
klaibyam ma sma gamah partha
naitat tvayy upapadyate
ksudram hrdaya-daurbalyam
tyaktvottistha parantapa
SYNONYMS
klaibyam--impotence; ma--do not; sma--take it; gamah--go in; partha--O
son of Prtha; na--never; etat--like this; tvayi--unto you; upadyate--is
befitting; ksudram--very little; hrdaya--heart; daurbalyam--weakness;
tyaktva--giving up; uttistha--get up; param-tapa--O chastiser of the
enemies.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not
become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser
of the enemy.
PURPORT
Arjuna was addressed as "the son of Prtha," who happened to be the
sister of Krsna's father Vasudeva. Therefore Arjuna had a blood
relationship with Krsna. If the son of a ksatriya declines to fight, he
is a ksatriya in name only, and if the son of a brahmana acts
impiously, he is a brahmana in name only. Such ksatriyas and brahmanas
are unworthy sons of their fathers; therefore, Krsna did not want
Arjuna to become an unworthy son of a ksatriya. Arjuna was the most
intimate friend of Krsna, and Krsna was directly guiding him on the
chariot; but in spite of all these credits, if Arjuna abandoned the
battle, he would be committing an infamous act; therefore Krsna said
that such an attitude in Arjuna did not fit his personality. Arjuna
might argue that he would give up the battle on the grounds of his
magnanimous attitude for the most respectable Bhisma and his relatives,
but Krsna considered that sort of magnanimity not approved by
authority. Therefore, such magnanimity or so-called nonviolence should
be given up by persons like Arjuna under the direct guidance of Krsna.
TEXT 4
arjuna uvaca
katham bhismam aham sankhye
dronam ca madhusudana
isubhih pratiyotsyami
pujarhav ari-sudana
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; katham--how; bhismam--unto Bhisma; aham--I;
sankhye--in the fight; dronam--unto Drona; ca--also; madhu-sudana--O
killer 
of 
Madhu; 
isubhih--with 
arrows; 
pratiyotsyami--shall
counterattack; puja-arhau--those who are worshipable; ari-sudana--O
killer of the enemies.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O killer of Madhu [Krsna], how can I counterattack with
arrows in battle men like Bhisma and Drona, who are worthy of my
worship?
PURPORT
Respectable superiors like Bhisma the grandfather and Dronacarya the
teacher are always worshipable. Even if they attack, they should not be
counterattacked. It is general etiquette that superiors are not to be
offered even a verbal fight. Even if they are sometimes harsh in
behavior, they should not be harshly treated. Then, how is it possible
for Arjuna to counterattack them? Would Krsna ever attack His own
grandfather, Ugrasena, or His teacher, Sandipani Muni? These were some
of the arguments by Arjuna to Krsna.
TEXT 5
gurun ahatva hi mahanubhavan
sreyo bhoktum bhaiksyam apiha loke
hatvartha-kamams tu gurun ihaiva
bhunjiya bhogan rudhira-pradigdhan
SYNONYMS
gurun--the superiors; ahatva--not killing; hi--certainly; maha-
anubhavan--great souls; sreyah--it is better; bhoktum--to enjoy life;
bhaiksyam--begging; api--even; iha--in this life; loke--in this world;
hatva--killing; artha--gain; kaman--so desiring; tu--but; gurun--
superiors; iha--in this world; eva--certainly; bhunjiya--has to enjoy;
bhogan--enjoyable things; rudhira--blood; pradigdhan--tainted with.
TRANSLATION
It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost
of the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they are
avaricious, they are nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, our
spoils will be tainted with blood.
PURPORT
According to scriptural codes, a teacher who engages in an abominable
action and has lost his sense of discrimination is fit to be abandoned.
Bhisma and Drona were obliged to take the side of Duryodhana because of
his financial assistance, although they should not have accepted such a
position simply on financial considerations. Under the circumstances,
they have lost the respectability of teachers. But Arjuna thinks that
nevertheless they remain his superiors, and therefore to enjoy material
profits after killing them would mean to enjoy spoils tainted with
blood.
TEXT 6
na caitad vidmah kataran no gariyo
yad va jayema yadi va no jayeyuh
yan eva hatva na jijivisamas
te 'vasthitah pramukhe dhartarastrah
SYNONYMS
na--nor; ca--also; etat--this; vidmah--do know; katarat--which; nah--
us; gariyah--better; yat--what; va--either; jayema--conquer us; yadi--
if; va--or; nah--us; jayeyuh--conquer; yan--those; eva--certainly;
hatva--by killing; na--never; jijivisamah--want to live; te--all of
them; avasthitah--are situated; pramukhe--in the front; dhartarastrah--
the sons of Dhrtarastra.
TRANSLATION
Nor do we know which is better--conquering them or being conquered by
them. The sons of Dhrtarastra, whom if we kill we should not care to
live, are now standing before us on this battlefield.
PURPORT
Arjuna did not know whether he should fight and risk unnecessary
violence, although fighting is the duty of the ksatriyas, or whether he
should refrain and live by begging. If he did not conquer the enemy,
begging would be his only means of subsistence. Nor was there certainty
of victory, because either side might emerge victorious. Even if
victory awaited them (and their cause was justified), still, if the
sons of Dhrtarastra died in battle, it would be very difficult to live
in their absence. Under the circumstances, that would be another kind
of defeat for them. All these considerations by Arjuna definitely
proved that he was not only a great devotee of the Lord but he was also
highly enlightened and had complete control over his mind and senses.
His desire to live by begging, although he was born in the royal
household, is another sign of detachment. He was truly virtuous, as
these qualities, combined with his faith in the words of instruction of
Sri Krsna (his spiritual master), indicate. It is concluded that Arjuna
was quite fit for liberation. Unless the senses are controlled, there
is no chance of elevation to the platform of knowledge, and without
knowledge and devotion there is no chance of liberation. Arjuna was
competent in all these attributes, over and above his enormous
attributes in his material relationships.
TEXT 7
karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
prcchami tvam dharma-sammudha-cetah
yac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan me
sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam
SYNONYMS
karpanya--miserly; dosa--weakness; upahata--being inflicted by; sva-
bhavah--characteristics; prcchami--I am asking; tvam--unto You; dharma-
-religion; sammudha--bewildered; cetah--in heart; yat--what; sreyah--
all-good; syat--may be; niscitam--confidently; bruhi--tell; tat--that;
me--unto me; sisyah--disciple; te--Your; aham--I am; sadhi--just
instruct; mam--me; tvam--unto You; prapannam--surrendered.
TRANSLATION
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of
weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what is
best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You.
Please instruct me.
PURPORT
By nature's own way the complete system of material activities is a
source of perplexity for everyone. In every step there is perplexity,
and therefore it behooves one to approach a bona fide spiritual master
who can give one proper guidance for executing the purpose of life. All
Vedic literatures advise us to approach a bona fide spiritual master to
get free from the perplexities of life which happen without our desire.
They are like a forest fire that somehow blazes without being set by
anyone. Similarly, the world situation is such that perplexities of
life automatically appear, without our wanting such confusion. No one
wants fire, and yet it takes place, and we become perplexed. The Vedic
wisdom therefore advises that in order to solve the perplexities of
life and to understand the science of the solution, one must approach a
spiritual master who is in the disciplic succession. A person with a
bona fide spiritual master is supposed to know everything. One should
not, therefore, remain in material perplexities but should approach a
spiritual master. This is the purport of this verse.
Who is the man in material perplexities? It is he who does not
understand the problems of life. In the Garga Upanisad the perplexed
man is described as follows: yo va etad aksaram gargy aviditvasmal
lokat praiti sa krpanah. "He is a miserly man who does not solve the
problems of life as a human and who thus quits this world like the cats
and dogs, without understanding the science of self-realization." This
human form of life is a most valuable asset for the living entity who
can utilize it for solving the problems of life; therefore, one who
does not utilize this opportunity properly is a miser. On the other
hand, there is the brahmana, or he who is intelligent enough to utilize
this body to solve all the problems of life.
The krpanas, or miserly persons, waste their time in being overly
affectionate for family, society, country, etc., in the material
conception of life. One is often attached to family life, namely to
wife, children and other members, on the basis of "skin disease." The
krpana thinks that he is able to protect his family members from death;
or the krpana thinks that his family or society can save him from the
verge of death. Such family attachment can be found even in the lower
animals who take care of children also. Being intelligent, Arjuna could
understand that his affection for family members and his wish to
protect them from death were the causes of his perplexities. Although
he could understand that his duty to fight was awaiting him, still, on
account of miserly weakness, he could not discharge the duties. He is
therefore asking Lord Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, to make a
definite solution. He offers himself to Krsna as a disciple. He wants
to stop friendly talks. Talks between the master and the disciple are
serious, and now Arjuna wants to talk very seriously before the
recognized spiritual master. Krsna is therefore the original spiritual
master of the science of Bhagavad-gita, and Arjuna is the first
disciple for understanding the Gita. How Arjuna understands the
Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Gita itself. And yet foolish mundane
scholars explain that one need not submit to Krsna as a person, but to
"the unborn within Krsna." There is no difference between Krsna's
within and without. And one who has no sense of this understanding is
the greatest fool in trying to understand Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 8
na hi prapasyami mamapanudyad
yac chokam ucchosanam indriyanam
avapya bhumav asapatnam rddham
rajyam suranam api cadhipatyam
SYNONYMS
na--do not; hi--certainly; prapasyami--I see; mama--my; apanudyat--can
drive away; yat--that; sokam--lamentation; ucchosanam--drying up;
indriyanam--of the senses; avapya--achieving; bhumau--on the earth;
asapatnam--without rival; rddham--prosperous; rajyam--kingdom; suranam-
-of the demigods; api--even; ca--also; adhipatyam--supremacy.
TRANSLATION
I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my
senses. I will not be able to destroy it even if I win an unrivaled
kingdom on earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.
PURPORT
Although Arjuna was putting forward so many arguments based on
knowledge of the principles of religion and moral codes, it appears
that he was unable to solve his real problem without the help of the
spiritual master, Lord Sri Krsna. He could understand that his so-
called knowledge was useless in driving away his problems, which were
drying up his whole existence; and it was impossible for him to solve
such perplexities without the help of a spiritual master like Lord
Krsna. Academic knowledge, scholarship, high position, etc., are all
useless in solving the problems of life; help can only be given by a
spiritual master like Krsna. Therefore, the conclusion is that a
spiritual master who is one hundred percent Krsna conscious is the bona
fide spiritual master, for he can solve the problems of life. Lord
Caitanya said that one who is master in the science of Krsna
consciousness, regardless of his social position, is the real spiritual
master.
kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, sudra kene naya
yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei 'guru' haya
"It does not matter whether a person is a vipra [learned scholar in
Vedic wisdom] or is born in a lower family, or is in the renounced
order of life--if he is master in the science of Krsna, he is the
perfect and bona fide spiritual master." (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya
8.128) So without being a master in the science of Krsna consciousness,
no one is a bona fide spiritual master. It is also said in the Vedic
literatures:
sat-karma-nipuno vipro
mantra-tantra-visaradah
avaisnavo gurur na syad
vaisnavah sva-paco guruh
"A scholarly brahmana, expert in all subjects of Vedic knowledge, is
unfit to become a spiritual master without being a Vaisnava, or expert
in the science of Krsna consciousness. But a person born in a family of
a lower caste can become a spiritual master if he is a Vaisnava, or
Krsna conscious." (Padma Purana)
The problems of material existence--birth, old age, disease and death--
cannot be counteracted by accumulation of wealth and economic
development. In many parts of the world there are states which are
replete with all facilities of life, which are full of wealth and
economically developed, yet the problems of material existence are
still present. They are seeking peace in different ways, but they can
achieve real happiness only if they consult Krsna, or the Bhagavad-gita
and Srimad-Bhagavatam--which constitute the science of Krsna--or the
bona fide representative of Krsna, the man in Krsna consciousness.
If economic development and material comforts could drive away one's
lamentations for family, social, national or international inebrieties,
then Arjuna would not have said that even an unrivaled kingdom on earth
or supremacy like that of the demigods in the heavenly planets would
not be able to drive away his lamentations. He sought, therefore,
refuge in Krsna consciousness, and that is the right path for peace and
harmony. Economic development or supremacy over the world can be
finished at any moment by the cataclysms of material nature. Even
elevation into a higher planetary situation, as men are now seeking a
place on the moon planet, can also be finished at one stroke. The
Bhagavad-gita confirms this: ksine punye martya-lokam visanti. "When
the results of pious activities are finished, one falls down again from
the peak of happiness to the lowest status of life." Many politicians
of the world have fallen down in that way. Such downfalls only
constitute more causes for lamentation.
Therefore, if we want to curb lamentation for good, then we have to
take shelter of Krsna, as Arjuna is seeking to do. So Arjuna asked
Krsna to solve his problem definitely, and that is the way of Krsna
consciousness.
TEXT 9
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva hrsikesam
gudakesah parantapah
na yotsya iti govindam
uktva tusnim babhuva ha
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--speaking; hrsikesam--
unto Krsna, the master of the senses; gudakesah--Arjuna, the master at
curbing ignorance; parantapah--the chastiser of the enemies; na yotsye-
-I shall not fight; iti--thus; govindam--unto Krsna, the giver of
pleasure; uktva--saying; tusnim--silent; babhuva--became; ha--
certainly.
TRANSLATION
Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus, Arjuna, chastiser of enemies, told
Krsna, "Govinda, I shall not fight," and fell silent.
PURPORT
Dhrtarastra must have been very glad to understand that Arjuna was not
going to fight and was instead leaving the battlefield for the begging
profession. But Sanjaya disappointed him again in relating that Arjuna
was competent to kill his enemies (parantapah). Although Arjuna was,
for the time being, overwhelmed with false grief due to family
affection, he surrendered unto Krsna, the supreme spiritual master, as
a disciple. This indicated that he would soon be free from the false
lamentation resulting from family affection and would be enlightened
with perfect knowledge of self-realization, or Krsna consciousness, and
would then surely fight. Thus Dhrtarastra's joy would be frustrated,
since Arjuna would be enlightened by Krsna and would fight to the end.
TEXT 10
tam uvaca hrsikesah
prahasann iva bharata
senayor ubhayor madhye
visidantam, idam vacah
SYNONYMS
tam--unto him; uvaca--said; hrsikesah--the master of the senses, Krsna;
prahasan--smiling; iva--like that; bharata--O Dhrtarastra, descendant
of Bharata; senayoh--of the armies; ubhayoh--of both parties; madhye--
between; visidantam--unto the lamenting one; idam--the following;
vacah--words.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, at that time Krsna, smiling, in the midst of
both the armies, spoke the following words to the grief-stricken
Arjuna.
PURPORT
The talk was going on between intimate friends, namely the Hrsikesa and
the Gudakesa. As friends, both of them were on the same level, but one
of them voluntarily became a student of the other. Krsna was smiling
because a friend had chosen to become a disciple. As Lord of all, He is
always in the superior position as the master of everyone, and yet the
Lord accepts one who wishes to be a friend, a son, a lover or a
devotee, or who wants Him in such a role. But when He was accepted as
the master, He at once assumed the role and talked with the disciple
like the master--with gravity, as it is required. It appears that the
talk between the master and the disciple was openly exchanged in the
presence of both armies so that all were benefited. So the talks of
Bhagavad-gita are not for any particular person, society, or community,
but they are for all, and friends or enemies are equally entitled to
hear them.
TEXT 11
sri-bhagavan uvaca
asocyan anvasocas tvam
prajna-vadams ca bhasase
gatasun agatasums ca
nanusocanti panditah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; asocyan--
that which is not worthy of lamentation; anvasocah--you are lamenting;
tvam--you; prajna-vadan--learned talks; ca--also; bhasase--speaking;
gata--lost; asun--life; agata--not past; asun--life; ca--also; na--
never; anusocanti--lament; panditah--the learned.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning
for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for
the living nor the dead.
PURPORT
The Lord at once took the position of the teacher and chastised the
student, calling him, indirectly, a fool. The Lord said, "You are
talking like a learned man, but you do not know that one who is
learned--one who knows what is body and what is soul--does not lament
for any stage of the body, neither in the living nor in the dead
condition." As it will be explained in later chapters, it will be clear
that knowledge means to know matter and spirit and the controller of
both. Arjuna argued that religious principles should be given more
importance than politics or sociology, but he did not know that
knowledge of matter, soul and the Supreme is even more important than
religious formularies. And, because he was lacking in that knowledge,
he should not have posed himself as a very learned man. As he did not
happen to be a very learned man, he was consequently lamenting for
something which was unworthy of lamentation. The body is born and is
destined to be vanquished today or tomorrow; therefore the body is not
as important as the soul. One who knows this is actually learned, and
for him there is no cause for lamentation, regardless of the condition
of the material body.
TEXT 12
na tv evaham jatu nasam
na tvam neme janadhipah
na caiva na bhavisyamah
sarve vayam atah param
SYNONYMS
na--never; tu--but; eva--certainly; aham--I; jatu--become; na--never;
asam--existed; na--it is not so; tvam--yourself; na--not; ime--all
these; jana-adhipah--kings; na--never; ca--also; eva--certainly; na--
not like that; bhavisyamah--shall exist; sarve--all of us; vayam--we;
atah param--hereafter.
TRANSLATION
Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.
PURPORT
In the Vedas, in the Katha Upanisad as well as in the Svetasvatara
Upanisad, it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
maintainer of innumerable living entities, in terms of their different
situations according to individual work and reaction of work. That
Supreme Personality of Godhead is also, by His plenary portions, alive
in the heart of every living entity. Only saintly persons who can see,
within and without, the same Supreme Lord, can actually attain to
perfect and eternal peace.
nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam
eko bahunam yo vidadhati kaman
tam atma-stham ye 'nupasyanti dhiras
tesam santih sasvati netaresam
The same Vedic truth given to Arjuna is given to all persons in the
world who pose themselves as very learned but factually have but a poor
fund of knowledge. The Lord says clearly that He Himself, Arjuna, and
all the kings who are assembled on the battlefield, are eternally
individual beings and that the Lord is eternally the maintainer of the
individual living entities both in their conditioned as well as in
their liberated situations. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the
supreme individual person, and Arjuna, the Lord's eternal associate,
and all the kings assembled there are individual, eternal persons. It
is not that they did not exist as individuals in the past, and it is
not that they will not remain eternal persons. Their individuality
existed in the past, and their individuality will continue in the
future without interruption. Therefore, there is no cause for
lamentation for anyone.
The Mayavadi theory that after liberation the individual soul,
separated by the covering of maya or illusion, will merge into the
impersonal Brahman and lose its individual existence is not supported
herein by Lord Krsna, the supreme authority. Nor is the theory that we
only think of individuality in the conditioned state supported herein.
Krsna clearly says herein that in the future also the individuality of
the Lord and others, as it is confirmed in the Upanisads, will continue
eternally. This statement of Krsna is authoritative because Krsna
cannot be subject to illusion. If individuality is not a fact, then
Krsna would not have stressed it so much--even for the future. The
Mayavadi may argue that the individuality spoken of by Krsna is not
spiritual, but material. Even accepting the argument that the
individuality is material, then how can one distinguish Krsna's
individuality? Krsna affirms His individuality in the past and confirms
His individuality in the future also. He has confirmed His
individuality in many ways, and impersonal Brahman has been declared to
be subordinate to Him. Krsna has maintained spiritual individuality all
along; if He is accepted as an ordinary conditioned soul in individual
consciousness, then His Bhagavad-gita has no value as authoritative
scripture. A common man with all the four defects of human frailty is
unable to teach that which is worth hearing. The Gita is above such
literature. No mundane book compares with the Bhagavad-gita. When one
accepts Krsna as an ordinary man, the Gita loses all importance. The
Mayavadi argues that the plurality mentioned in this verse is
conventional and that it refers to the body. But previous to this verse
such a bodily conception is already condemned. After condemning the
bodily conception of the living entities, how was it possible for Krsna
to place a conventional proposition on the body again? Therefore,
individuality is maintained on spiritual grounds and is thus confirmed
by great acaryas like Sri Ramanuja and others. It is clearly mentioned
in many places in the Gita that this spiritual individuality is
understood by those who are devotees of the Lord. Those who are envious
of Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead have no bona fide access
to this great literature. The nondevotee's approach to the teachings of
the Gita is something like bees licking on a bottle of honey. One
cannot have a taste of honey unless one opens the bottle. Similarly,
the mysticism of the Bhagavad-gita can be understood only by devotees,
and no one else can taste it, as it is stated in the Fourth Chapter of
the book. Nor can the Gita be touched by persons who envy the very
existence of the Lord. Therefore, the Mayavadi explanation of the Gita
is a most misleading presentation of the whole truth. Lord Caitanya has
forbidden us to read commentations made by the Mayavadis and warns that
one who takes to such an understanding of the Mayavadi philosophy loses
all power to understand the real mystery of the Gita. If individuality
refers to the empirical universe, then there is no need of teaching by
the Lord. The plurality of the individual soul and of the Lord is an
eternal fact, and it is confirmed by the Vedas as above mentioned.
TEXT 13
dehino 'smin yatha dehe
kaumaram yauvanam jara
tatha dehantara-praptir
dhiras tatra na muhyati
SYNONYMS
dehinah--of the embodied; asmin--in this; yatha--as; dehe--in the body;
kaumaram--boyhood; yauvanam--youth; jara--old age; tatha--similarly;
deha-antara--transference of the body; praptih--achievement; dhirah--
the sober; tatra--thereupon; na--never; muhyati--deluded.
TRANSLATION
As the embodied soul continuously passes, in this body, from boyhood to
youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death.
A self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.
PURPORT
Since every living entity is an individual soul, each is changing his
body every moment, manifesting sometimes as a child, sometimes as a
youth, and sometimes as an old man. Yet the same spirit soul is there
and does not undergo any change. This individual soul finally changes
the body at death and transmigrates to another body; and since it is
sure to have another body in the next birth--either material or
spiritual--there was no cause for lamentation by Arjuna on account of
death, neither for Bhisma nor for Drona, for whom he was so much
concerned. Rather, he should rejoice for their changing bodies from old
to new ones, thereby rejuvenating their energy. Such changes of body
account for varieties of enjoyment or suffering, according to one's
work in life. So Bhisma and Drona, being noble souls, were surely going
to have either spiritual bodies in the next life, or at least life in
heavenly bodies for superior enjoyment of material existence. So, in
either case, there was no cause of lamentation.
Any man who has perfect knowledge of the constitution of the individual
soul, the Supersoul and nature--both material and spiritual--is called
a dhira or a most sober man. Such a man is never deluded by the change
of bodies. The Mayavadi theory of oneness of the spirit soul cannot be
entertained on the ground that the spirit soul cannot be cut into
pieces as a fragmental portion. Such cutting into different individual
souls would make the Supreme cleavable or changeable, against the
principle of the Supreme Soul being unchangeable. As confirmed in the
Gita, the fragmental portions of the Supreme exist eternally (sanatana)
and are called ksara; that is, they have a tendency to fall down into
material nature. These fragmental portions are eternally so, and even
after liberation, the individual soul remains the same--fragmental. But
once liberated, he lives an eternal life in bliss and knowledge with
the Personality of Godhead. The theory of reflection can be applied to
the Supersoul, who is present in each and every individual body and is
known as the Paramatma, who is different from the individual living
entity. When the sky is reflected in water, the reflections represent
both the sun and the moon and the stars also. The stars can be compared
to the living entities and the sun or the moon to the Supreme Lord. The
individual fragmental spirit soul is represented by Arjuna, and the
Supreme Soul is the Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna. They are not on
the same level, as it will be apparent in the beginning of the Fourth
Chapter. If Arjuna is on the same level with Krsna, and Krsna is not
superior to Arjuna, then their relationship of instructor and
instructed becomes meaningless. If both of them are deluded by the
illusory energy (maya), then there is no need of one being the
instructor and the other the instructed. Such instruction would be
useless because, in the clutches of maya, no one can be an
authoritative instructor. Under the circumstances, it is admitted that
Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord, superior in position to the living
entity, Arjuna, who is a forgetful soul deluded by maya.
TEXT 14
matra-sparsas tu kaunteya
sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah
agamapayino 'nityas
tams titiksasva bharata
SYNONYMS
matra--sensuous; sparsah--perception; tu--only; kaunteya--O son of
Kunti; sita--winter; usna--summer; sukha--happiness; duhkha-dah--giving
pain; agama--appearing; apayinah--disappearing; anityah--nonpermanent;
tan--all of them; titiksasva--just try to tolerate; bharata--O
descendant of the Bharata dynasty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress,
and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and
disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense
perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them
without being disturbed.
PURPORT
In the proper discharge of duty, one has to learn to tolerate
nonpermanent appearances and disappearances of happiness and distress.
According to Vedic injunction, one has to take his bath early in the
morning even during the month of Magha (January-February). It is very
cold at that time, but in spite of that a man who abides by the
religious principles does not hesitate to take his bath. Similarly, a
woman does not hesitate to cook in the kitchen in the months of May and
June, the hottest part of the summer season. One has to execute his
duty in spite of climatic inconveniences. Similarly, to fight is the
religious principle of the ksatriyas, and although one has to fight
with some friend or relative, one should not deviate from his
prescribed duty. One has to follow the prescribed rules and regulations
of religious principles in order to rise up to the platform of
knowledge because by knowledge and devotion only can one liberate
himself from the clutches of maya (illusion).
The two different names of address given to Arjuna are also
significant. To address him as Kaunteya signifies his great blood
relations from his mother's side; and to address him as Bharata
signifies his greatness from his father's side. From both sides he is
supposed to have a great heritage. A great heritage brings
responsibility in the matter of proper discharge of duties; therefore,
he cannot avoid fighting.
TEXT 15
yam hi na vyathayanty ete
purusam purusarsabha
sama-duhkha-sukham dhiram
so 'mrtatvaya kalpate
SYNONYMS
yam--one whom; hi--certainly; na--never; vyathayanti--are distressing;
ete--all these; purusam--to a person; purusa-rsabha--O best among men;
sama--unaltered; duhkha--distressed; sukham--happiness; dhiram--
patient; sah--he; amrtatvaya--for liberation; kalpate--is considered
eligible.
TRANSLATION
O best among men [Arjuna], the person who is not disturbed by happiness
and distress and is steady in both is certainly eligible for
liberation.
PURPORT
Anyone who is steady in his determination for the advanced stage of
spiritual realization and can equally tolerate the onslaughts of
distress and happiness is certainly a person eligible for liberation.
In the varnasrama institution, the fourth stage of life, namely the
renounced order (sannyasa), is a painstaking situation. But one who is
serious about making his life perfect surely adopts the sannyasa order
of life in spite of all difficulties. The difficulties usually arise
from having to sever family relationships, to give up the connection of
wife and children. But if anyone is able to tolerate such difficulties,
surely his path to spiritual realization is complete. Similarly, in
Arjuna's discharge of duties as a ksatriya, he is advised to persevere,
even if it is difficult to fight with his family members or similarly
beloved persons. Lord Caitanya took sannyasa at the age of twenty-four,
and His dependents, young wife as well as old mother, had no one else
to look after them. Yet for a higher cause He took sannyasa and was
steady in the discharge of higher duties. That is the way of achieving
liberation from material bondage.
TEXT 16
nasato vidyate bhavo
nabhavo vidyate satah
ubhayor api drsto 'ntas
tv anayos tattva-darsibhih
SYNONYMS
na--never; asatah--of the nonexistent; vidyate--there is; bhavah--
endurance; na--never; abhavah--changing quality; vidyate--there is;
satah--of the eternal; ubhayoh--of the two; api--verily; drstah--
observed; antah--conclusion; tu--but; anayoh--of them; tattva--truth;
darsibhih--by the seers.
TRANSLATION
Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that of the nonexistent
there is no endurance, and of the existent there is no cessation. This
seers have concluded by studying the nature of both.
PURPORT
There is no endurance of the changing body. That the body is changing
every moment by the actions and reactions of the different cells is
admitted by modern medical science; and thus growth and old age are
taking place in the body. But the spirit soul exists permanently,
remaining the same despite all changes of the body and the mind. That
is the difference between matter and spirit. By nature, the body is
ever changing, and the soul is eternal. This conclusion is established
by all classes of seers of the truth, both impersonalist and
personalist. In the Visnu Purana (2.12.38) it is stated that Visnu and
His abodes all have self-illuminated spiritual existence (jyotimsi
visnur bhuvanani visnuh). The words existent and nonexistent refer only
to spirit and matter. That is the version of all seers of truth.
This is the beginning of the instruction by the Lord to the living
entities who are bewildered by the influence of ignorance. Removal of
ignorance involves the reestablishment of the eternal relationship
between the worshiper and the worshipable and the consequent
understanding of the difference between the part and parcel living
entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can understand the
nature of the Supreme by thorough study of oneself, the difference
between oneself and the Supreme being understood as the relationship
between the part and the whole. In the Vedanta-sutras, as well as in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Supreme has been accepted as the origin of
all emanations. Such emanations are experienced by superior and
inferior natural sequences. The living entities belong to the superior
nature, as it will be revealed in the Seventh Chapter. Although there
is no difference between the energy and the energetic, the energetic is
accepted as the Supreme, and energy or nature is accepted as the
subordinate. The living entities, therefore, are always subordinate to
the Supreme Lord, as in the case of the master and the servant, or the
teacher and the taught. Such clear knowledge is impossible to
understand under the spell of ignorance, and to drive away such
ignorance the Lord teaches the Bhagavad-gita for the enlightenment of
all living entities for all time.
TEXT 17
avinasi tu tad viddhi
yena sarvam idam tatam
vinasam avyayasyasya
na kascit kartum arhati
SYNONYMS
avinasi--imperishable; tu--but; tat--that; viddhi--know it; yena--by
whom; sarvam--all of the body; idam--this; tatam--pervaded; vinasam--
destruction; avyayasya--of the imperishable; asya--of it; na kascit--no
one; kartum--to do; arhati--is able.
TRANSLATION
Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is
able to destroy the imperishable soul.
PURPORT
This verse more clearly explains the real nature of the soul, which is
spread all over the body. Anyone can understand what is spread all over
the body: it is consciousness. Everyone is conscious of the pains and
pleasures of the body in part or as a whole. This spreading of
consciousness is limited within one's own body. The pains and pleasures
of one body are unknown to another. Therefore, each and every body is
the embodiment of an individual soul, and the symptom of the soul's
presence is perceived as individual consciousness. This soul is
described as one ten-thousandth part of the upper portion of the hair
point in size. The Svetasvatara Upanisad (5.9) confirms this:
balagra-sata-bhagasya
satadha kalpitasya ca
bhago jivah vijneyah
sa canantyaya kalpate
"When the upper point of a hair is divided into one hundred parts and
again each of such parts is further divided into one hundred parts,
each such part is the measurement of the dimension of the spirit soul."
Similarly the same version is stated:
kesagra-sata-bhagasya
satamsah sadrsatmakah
jivah suksma-svarupo 'yam
sankhyatito hi cit-kanah
"There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are measured
as one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of the hair."
Therefore, the individual particle of spirit soul is a spiritual atom
smaller than the material atoms, and such atoms are innumerable. This
very small spiritual spark is the basic principle of the material body,
and the influence of such a spiritual spark is spread all over the body
as the influence of the active principle of some medicine spreads
throughout the body. This current of the spirit soul is felt all over
the body as consciousness, and that is the proof of the presence of the
soul. Any layman can understand that the material body minus
consciousness is a dead body, and this consciousness cannot be revived
in the body by any means of material administration. Therefore,
consciousness is not due to any amount of material combination, but to
the spirit soul. In the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.9) the measurement of the
atomic spirit soul is further explained:
eso 'nur atma cetasa veditavyo
yasmin pranah pancadha samvivesa
pranais cittam sarvam otam prajanam
yasmin visuddhe vibhavaty esa atma
"The soul is atomic in size and can be perceived by perfect
intelligence. This atomic soul is floating in the five kinds of air
[prana, apana, vyana, samana and udana], is situated within the heart,
and spreads its influence all over the body of the embodied living
entities. When the soul is purified from the contamination of the five
kinds of material air, its spiritual influence is exhibited."
The hatha-yoga system is meant for controlling the five kinds of air
encircling the pure soul by different kinds of sitting postures--not
for any material profit, but for liberation of the minute soul from the
entanglement of the material atmosphere.
So the constitution of the atomic soul is admitted in all Vedic
literatures, and it is also actually felt in the practical experience
of any sane man. Only the insane man can think of this atomic soul as
all-pervading visnu-tattva.
The influence of the atomic soul can be spread all over a particular
body. According to the Mundaka Upanisad, this atomic soul is situated
in the heart of every living entity, and because the measurement of the
atomic soul is beyond the power of appreciation of the material
scientists, some of them assert foolishly that there is no soul. The
individual atomic soul is definitely there in the heart along with the
Supersoul, and thus all the energies of bodily movement are emanating
from this part of the body. The corpuscles which carry the oxygen from
the lungs gather energy from the soul. When the soul passes away from
this position, activity of the blood, generating fusion, ceases.
Medical science accepts the importance of the red corpuscles, but it
cannot ascertain that the source of the energy is the soul. Medical
science, however, does admit that the heart is the seat of all energies
of the body.
Such atomic particles of the spirit whole are compared to the sunshine
molecules. In the sunshine there are innumerable radiant molecules.
Similarly, the fragmental parts of the Supreme Lord are atomic sparks
of the rays of the Supreme Lord, called by the name prabha, or superior
energy. Neither Vedic knowledge nor modern science denies the existence
of the spirit soul in the body, and the science of the soul is
explicitly described in the Bhagavad-gita by the Personality of Godhead
Himself.
TEXT 18
antavanta ime deha
nityasyoktah saririnah
anasino 'prameyasya
tasmad yudhyasva bharata
SYNONYMS
anta-vantah--perishable; ime--all these; dehah--material bodies;
nityasya--eternal in existence; uktah--it is so said; saririnah--the
embodied soul; anasinah--never to be destroyed; aprameyasya--
immeasurable; 
tasmat--therefore; 
yudhyasva--fight; 
bharata--O
descendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Only the material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and eternal
living entity is subject to destruction; therefore, fight, O descendant
of Bharata.
PURPORT
The material body is perishable by nature. It may perish immediately,
or it may do so after a hundred years. It is a question of time only.
There is no chance of maintaining it indefinitely. But the spirit soul
is so minute that it cannot even be seen by an enemy, to say nothing of
being killed. As mentioned in the previous verse, it is so small that
no one can have any idea how to measure its dimension. So from both
viewpoints there is no cause of lamentation because the living entity
can neither be killed as he is, nor can the material body, which cannot
be saved for any length of time, be permanently protected. The minute
particle of the whole spirit acquires this material body according to
his work, and therefore observance of religious principles should be
utilized. In the Vedanta-sutras the living entity is qualified as light
because he is part and parcel of the supreme light. As sunlight
maintains the entire universe, so the light of the soul maintains this
material body. As soon as the spirit soul is out of this material body,
the body begins to decompose; therefore it is the spirit soul which
maintains this body. The body itself is unimportant. Arjuna was advised
to fight and sacrifice the material body for the cause of religion.
TEXT 19
ya enam vetti hantaram
yas cainam manyate hatam
ubhau tau na vijanito
nayam hanti na hanyate
SYNONYMS
yah--anyone; enam--this; vetti--knows; hantaram--the killer; yah--
anyone; ca--also; enam--this; manyate--thinks; hatam--killed; ubhau--
both of them; tau--they; na--never; vijanitah--in knowledge; na--never;
ayam--this; hanti--kills; na--nor; hanyate--be killed.
TRANSLATION
He who thinks that the living entity is the slayer or that he is slain,
does not understand. One who is in knowledge knows that the self slays
not nor is slain.
PURPORT
When an embodied living entity is hurt by fatal weapons, it is to be
known that the living entity within the body is not killed. The spirit
soul is so small that it is impossible to kill him by any material
weapon, as is evident from the previous verses. Nor is the living
entity killable, because of his spiritual constitution. What is killed,
or is supposed to be killed, is the body only. This, however, does not
at all encourage killing of the body. The Vedic injunction is ma
himsyat sarva bhutani: never commit violence to anyone. Nor does
understanding that the living entity is not killed encourage animal
slaughter. Killing the body of anyone without authority is abominable
and is punishable by the law of the state as well as by the law of the
Lord. Arjuna, however, is being engaged in killing for the principle of
religion, and not whimsically.
TEXT 20
na jayate mriyate va kadacin
nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah
ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano
na hanyate hanyamane sarire
SYNONYMS
na--never; jayate--takes birth; mriyate--never dies; va--either;
kadacit--at any time (past, present or future); na--never; ayam--this;
bhutva--came into being; bhavita--will come to be; va--or; na--not;
bhuyah--or has coming to be; ajah--unborn; nityah--eternal; sasvatah--
permanent; ayam--this; puranah--the oldest; na--never; hanyate--is
killed; hanyamane--being killed; sarire--by the body.
TRANSLATION
For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been,
does He ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying
and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.
PURPORT
Qualitatively, the small atomic fragmental part of the Supreme Spirit
is one with the Supreme. He undergoes no changes like the body.
Sometimes the soul is called the steady, or kutastha. The body is
subject to six kinds of transformations. It takes its birth from the
womb of the mother's body, remains for some time, grows, produces some
effects, gradually dwindles, and at last vanishes into oblivion. The
soul, however, does not go through such changes. The soul is not born,
but, because he takes on a material body, the body takes its birth. The
soul does not take birth there, and the soul does not die. Anything
which has birth also has death. And because the soul has no birth, he
therefore has no past, present or future. He is eternal, ever-existing,
and primeval--that is, there is no trace in history of his coming into
being. Under the impression of the body, we seek the history of birth,
etc., of the soul. The soul does not at any time become old, as the
body does. The so-called old man, therefore, feels himself to be in the
same spirit as in his childhood or youth. The changes of the body do
not affect the soul. The soul does not deteriorate like a tree, nor
anything material. The soul has no by-product either. The by-products
of the body, namely children, are also different individual souls; and,
owing to the body, they appear as children of a particular man. The
body develops because of the soul's presence, but the soul has neither
offshoots nor change. Therefore, the soul is free from the six changes
of the body.
In the Katha Upanisad (1.2.18) also we find a similar passage which
reads:
na jayate mriyate va vipascin
nayam kutascin na babhuva kascit
ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano
na hanyate hanyamane sarire
The meaning and purport of this verse is the same as in the Bhagavad-
gita, but here in this verse there is one special word, vipascit, which
means learned or with knowledge.
The soul is full of knowledge, or full always with consciousness.
Therefore, consciousness is the symptom of the soul. Even if one does
not find the soul within the heart, where he is situated, one can still
understand the presence of the soul simply by the presence of
consciousness. Sometimes we do not find the sun in the sky owing to
clouds, or for some other reason, but the light of the sun is always
there, and we are convinced that it is therefore daytime. As soon as
there is a little light in the sky early in the morning, we can
understand that the sun is in the sky. Similarly, since there is some
consciousness in all bodies--whether man or animal--we can understand
the presence of the soul. This consciousness of the soul is, however,
different from the consciousness of the Supreme because the supreme
consciousness is all-knowledge--past, present and future. The
consciousness of the individual soul is prone to be forgetful. When he
is forgetful of his real nature, he obtains education and enlightenment
from the superior lessons of Krsna. But Krsna is not like the forgetful
soul. If so, Krsna's teachings of Bhagavad-gita would be useless.
There are two kinds of souls--namely the minute particle soul (anu-
atma) and the Supersoul (vibhu-atma). This is also confirmed in the
Katha Upanisad (1.2.20) in this way:
anor aniyan mahato mahiyan
atmasya jantor nihito guhayam
tam akratuh pasyati vita-soko
dhatuh prasadan mahimanam atmanah
"Both the Supersoul [Paramatma] and the atomic soul [jivatma] are
situated on the same tree of the body within the same heart of the
living being, and only one who has become free from all material
desires as well as lamentations can, by the grace of the Supreme,
understand the glories of the soul." Krsna is the fountainhead of the
Supersoul also, as it will be disclosed in the following chapters, and
Arjuna is the atomic soul, forgetful of his real nature; therefore he
requires to be enlightened by Krsna, or by His bona fide representative
(the spiritual master).
TEXT 21
vedavinasinam nityam
ya enam ajam avyayam
katham sa purusah partha
kam ghatayati hanti kam
SYNONYMS
veda--in knowledge; avinasinam--indestructible; nityam--always; yah--
one who; enam--this (soul); ajam--unborn; avyayam--immutable; katham--
how; sah--he; purusah--person; partha--O Partha (Arjuna); kam--whom;
ghatayati--hurts; hanti--kills; kam--whom.
TRANSLATION
O Partha, how can a person who knows that the soul is indestructible,
unborn, eternal and immutable, kill anyone or cause anyone to kill?
PURPORT
Everything has its proper utility, and a man who is situated in
complete knowledge knows how and where to apply a thing for its proper
utility. Similarly, violence also has its utility, and how to apply
violence rests with the person in knowledge. Although the justice of
the peace awards capital punishment to a person condemned for murder,
the justice of the peace cannot be blamed because he orders violence to
another person according to the codes of justice. In Manu-samhita, the
lawbook for mankind, it is supported that a murderer should be
condemned to death so that in his next life he will not have to suffer
for the great sin he has committed. Therefore, the king's punishment of
hanging a murderer is actually beneficial. Similarly, when Krsna orders
fighting, it must be concluded that violence is for supreme justice,
and, as such, Arjuna should follow the instruction, knowing well that
such violence, committed in the act of fighting for Krsna, is not
violence at all because, at any rate, the man, or rather the soul,
cannot be killed; so for the administration of justice, so-called
violence is permitted. A surgical operation is not meant to kill the
patient, but to cure him. Therefore the fighting to be executed by
Arjuna at the instruction of Krsna is with full knowledge, so there is
no possibility of sinful reaction.
TEXT 22
vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya
navani grhnati naro 'parani
tatha sarirani vihaya jirnany
anyani samyati navani dehi
SYNONYMS
vasamsi--garments; jirnani--old and worn out; yatha--as it is; vihaya--
giving up; navani--new garments; grhnati--does accept; narah--a man;
aparani--other; tatha--in the same way; sarirani--bodies; vihaya--
giving up; jirnani--old and useless; anyani--different; samyati--verily
accepts; navani--new sets; dehi--the embodied.
TRANSLATION
As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the
soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones.
PURPORT
Change of body by the atomic individual soul is an accepted fact. Even
some of the modern scientists who do not believe in the existence of
the soul, but at the same time cannot explain the source of energy from
the heart, have to accept continuous changes of body which appear from
childhood to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and again from youth to
old age. From old age, the change is transferred to another body. This
has already been explained in a previous verse.
Transference of the atomic individual soul to another body is made
possible by the grace of the Supersoul. The Supersoul fulfills the
desire of the atomic soul as one friend fulfills the desire of another.
The Vedas, like the Mundaka Upanisad, as well as the Svetasvatara
Upanisad, compare the soul and the Supersoul to two friendly birds
sitting on the same tree. One of the birds (the individual atomic soul)
is eating the fruit of the tree, and the other bird (Krsna) is simply
watching His friend. Of these two birds--although they are the same in
quality--one is captivated by the fruits of the material tree, while
the other is simply witnessing the activities of His friend. Krsna is
the witnessing bird, and Arjuna is the eating bird. Although they are
friends, one is still the master and the other is the servant.
Forgetfulness of this relationship by the atomic soul is the cause of
one's changing his position from one tree to another or from one body
to another. The jiva soul is struggling very hard on the tree of the
material body, but as soon as he agrees to accept the other bird as the
supreme spiritual master--as Arjuna agreed to do by voluntary surrender
unto Krsna for instruction--the subordinate bird immediately becomes
free from all lamentations. Both the Mundaka Upanisad (3.1.2) and
Svetasvatara Upanisad (4.7) confirm this:
samane vrkse puruso nimagno
'nisaya socati muhyamanah
justam yada pasyaty anyam isam
asya mahimanam iti vita-sokah
"Although the two birds are in the same tree, the eating bird is fully
engrossed with anxiety and moroseness as the enjoyer of the fruits of
the tree. But if in some way or other he turns his face to his friend
who is the Lord and knows His glories--at once the suffering bird
becomes free from all anxieties." Arjuna has now turned his face
towards his eternal friend, Krsna, and is understanding the Bhagavad-
gita from Him. And thus, hearing from Krsna, he can understand the
supreme glories of the Lord and be free from lamentation.
Arjuna is advised herewith by the Lord not to lament for the bodily
change of his old grandfather and his teacher. He should rather be
happy to kill their bodies in the righteous fight so that they may be
cleansed at once of all reactions from various bodily activities. One
who lays down his life on the sacrificial altar, or in the proper
battlefield, is at once cleansed of bodily reactions and promoted to a
higher status of life. So there was no cause for Arjuna's lamentation.
TEXT 23
nainam chindanti sastrani
nainam dahati pavakah
na cainam kledayanty apo
na sosayati marutah
SYNONYMS
na--never; enam--this soul; chindanti--can cut to pieces; sastrani--all
weapons; na--never; enam--unto this soul; dahati--burns; pavakah--fire;
na--never; ca--also; enam--unto this soul; kledayanti--moistens; apah--
water; na--never; sosayati--dries; marutah--wind.
TRANSLATION
The soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by fire,
nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.
PURPORT
All kinds of weapons, swords, flames, rains, tornadoes, etc.--are
unable to kill the spirit soul. It appears that there were many kinds
of weapons made of earth, water, air, ether, etc., in addition to the
modern weapons of fire. Even the nuclear weapons of the modern age are
classified as fire weapons, but formerly there were other weapons made
of all different kinds of material elements. Firearms were counteracted
by water weapons, which are now unknown to modern science. Nor do
modern scientists have knowledge of tornado weapons. Nonetheless, the
soul can never be cut into pieces, nor annihilated by any number of
weapons, regardless of scientific devices.
Nor was it ever possible to cut the individual souls from the original
Soul. The Mayavadi, however, cannot describe how the individual soul
evolved from ignorance and consequently became covered by illusory
energy. Because they are atomic individual souls (sanatana) eternally,
they are prone to be covered by the illusory energy, and thus they
become separated from the association of the Supreme Lord, just as the
sparks of the fire, although one in quality with the fire, are prone to
be extinguished when out of the fire. In the Varaha Purana, the living
entities are described as separated parts and parcels of the Supreme.
They are eternally so, according to the Bhagavad-gita also. So, even
after being liberated from illusion, the living entity remains a
separate identity, as is evident from the teachings of the Lord to
Arjuna. Arjuna became liberated by the knowledge received from Krsna,
but he never became one with Krsna.
TEXT 24
acchedyo 'yam adahyo 'yam
akledyo 'sosya eva ca
nityah sarva-gatah sthanur
acalo 'yam sanatanah
SYNONYMS
acchedyah--unbreakable; ayam--this soul; adahyah--cannot be burned;
ayam--this soul; akledyah--insoluble; asosyah--cannot be dried; eva--
certainly; ca--and; nityah--everlasting; sarva-gatah--all-pervading;
sthanuh--unchangeable; acalah--immovable; ayam--this soul; sanatanah--
eternally the same.
TRANSLATION
This individual soul is unbreakable and insoluble, and can be neither
burned nor dried. He is everlasting, all-pervading, unchangeable,
immovable and eternally the same.
PURPORT
All these qualifications of the atomic soul definitely prove that the
individual soul is eternally the atomic particle of the spirit whole,
and he remains the same atom eternally, without change. The theory of
monism is very difficult to apply in this case, because the individual
soul is never expected to become one homogeneously. After liberation
from material contamination, the atomic soul may prefer to remain as a
spiritual spark in the effulgent rays of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but the intelligent souls enter into the spiritual planets to
associate with the Personality of Godhead.
The word sarva-gata ("all-pervading") is significant because there is
no doubt that living entities are all over God's creation. They live on
the land, in the water, in the air, within the earth and even within
fire. The belief that they are sterilized in fire is not acceptable,
because it is clearly stated here that the soul cannot be burned by
fire. Therefore, there is no doubt that there are living entities also
in the sun planet with suitable bodies to live there. If the sun globe
is uninhabited, then the word sarva-gata--"living everywhere"--becomes
meaningless.
TEXT 25
avyakto 'yam acintyo 'yam
avikaryo 'yam ucyate
tasmad evam viditvainam
nanusocitum arhasi
SYNONYMS
avyaktah--invisible; ayam--this soul; acintyah--inconceivable; ayam--
this soul; avikaryah--unchangeable; ayam--this soul; ucyate--is said;
tasmat--therefore; evam--like this; viditva--knowing it well; enam--
this soul; na--do not; anusocitum--may lament over; arhasi--you
deserve.
TRANSLATION
It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
unchangeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.
PURPORT
As described previously, the magnitude of the soul is so small for our
material calculation that he cannot be seen even by the most powerful
microscope; therefore, he is invisible. As far as the soul's existence
is concerned, no one can establish his existence experimentally beyond
the proof of sruti, or Vedic wisdom. We have to accept this truth,
because there is no other source of understanding the existence of the
soul, although it is a fact by perception. There are many things we
have to accept solely on grounds of superior authority. No one can deny
the existence of his father, based upon the authority of his mother.
There is no source of understanding the identity of the father except
by the authority of the mother. Similarly, there is no source of
understanding the soul except by studying the Vedas. In other words,
the soul is inconceivable by human experimental knowledge. The soul is
consciousness and conscious--that also is the statement of the Vedas,
and we have to accept that. Unlike the bodily changes, there is no
change in the soul. As eternally unchangeable, the soul remains atomic
in comparison to the infinite Supreme Soul. The Supreme Soul is
infinite, and the atomic soul is infinitesimal. Therefore, the
infinitesimal soul, being unchangeable, can never become equal to the
infinite soul, or the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This concept is
repeated in the Vedas in different ways just to confirm the stability
of the conception of the soul. Repetition of something is necessary in
order that we understand the matter thoroughly, without error.
TEXT 26
atha cainam nitya-jatam
nityam va manyase mrtam
tathapi tvam maha-baho
nainam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMS
atha--if, however; ca--also; enam--this soul; nitya-jatam--always born;
nityam--forever; va--either; manyase--so think; mrtam--dead; tatha api-
-still; tvam--you; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; na--never; enam--
about the soul; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you think that the soul is perpetually born and always
dies still, you still have no reason to lament, O mighty-armed.
PURPORT
There is always a class of philosophers, almost akin to the Buddhists,
who do not believe in the separate existence of the soul beyond the
body. When Lord Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita, it appears that such
philosophers existed, and they were known as the lokayatikas and
vaibhasikas. These philosophers maintained that life symptoms, or soul,
takes place at a certain mature condition of material combination. The
modern material scientist and materialist philosophers also think
similarly. According to them, the body is a combination of physical
elements, and at a certain stage the life symptoms develop by
interaction of the physical body and chemical elements. The science of
anthropology is based on this philosophy. Currently, many pseudo
religions--now becoming fashionable in America--are also adhering to
this philosophy, as well as to the nihilistic nondevotional Buddhist
sects.
Even if Arjuna did not believe in the existence of the soul--as in the
vaibhasika philosophy--there would still have been no cause for
lamentation. No one laments the loss of a certain bulk of chemicals and
stops discharging his prescribed duty. On the other hand, in modern
science and scientific warfare, so many tons of chemicals are wasted
for achieving victory over the enemy. According to the vaibhasika
philosophy, the so-called soul or atma vanishes along with the
deterioration of the body. So, in any case, whether Arjuna accepted the
Vedic conclusion that there is an atomic soul, or whether he did not
believe in the existence of the soul, he had no reason to lament.
According to this theory, since there are so many living entities
generating out of matter every moment, and so many of them are being
vanquished at every moment, there is no need to grieve for such an
incidence. However, since he was not risking rebirth of the soul,
Arjuna had no reason to be afraid of being affected with sinful
reactions due to his killing his grandfather and teacher. But at the
same time, Krsna sarcastically addressed Arjuna as maha-bahu, mighty-
armed, because He, at least, did not accept the theory of the
vaibhasikas, which leaves aside the Vedic wisdom. As a ksatriya, Arjuna
belonged to the Vedic culture, and it behooved him to continue to
follow its principles.
TEXT 27
jatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur
dhruvam janma mrtasya ca
tasmad apariharye 'rthe
na tvam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMS
jatasya--one who has taken his birth; hi--certainly; dhruvah--a fact;
mrtyuh--death; dhruvam--it is also a fact; janma--birth; mrtasya--of
the dead; ca--also; tasmat--therefore; apariharye--for that which is
unavoidable; arthe--in the matter of; na--do not; tvam--you; socitum--
to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATION
For one who has taken his birth, death if certain; and for one who is
dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your
duty, you should not lament.
PURPORT
One has to take birth according to one's activities of life. And, after
finishing one term of activities, one has to die to take birth for the
next. In this way the cycle of birth and death is revolving, one after
the other without liberation. This cycle of birth and death does not,
however, support unnecessary murder, slaughter and war. But at the same
time, violence and war are inevitable factors in human society for
keeping law and order.
The Battle of Kuruksetra, being the will of the Supreme, was an
inevitable event, and to fight for the right cause is the duty of a
ksatriya. Why should he be afraid of or aggrieved at the death of his
relatives since he was discharging his proper duty? He did not deserve
to break the law, thereby becoming subjected to the reactions of sinful
acts, of which he was so afraid. By avoiding the discharge of his
proper duty, he would not be able to stop the death of his relatives,
and he would be degraded due to his selection of the wrong path of
action.
TEXT 28
avyaktadini bhutani
vyakta-madhyani bharata
avyakta-nidhanany eva
tatra ka paridevana
SYNONYMS
avyakta-adini--in the beginning unmanifested; bhutani--all that are
created; vyakta--manifested; madhyani--in the middle; bharata--O
descendant of Bharata; avyakta--nonmanifested; nidhanani--all that are
vanquished; eva--it is all like that; tatra--therefore; ka--what;
paridevana--lamentation.
TRANSLATION
All created beings are unmanifest in their beginning, manifest in their
interim state, and unmanifest again when they are annihilated. So what
need is there for lamentation?
PURPORT
Accepting that there are two classes of philosophers, one believing in
the existence of the soul and the other not believing in the existence
of the soul, there is no cause for lamentation in either case.
Nonbelievers in the existence of the soul are called atheists by
followers of Vedic wisdom. Yet even if, for argument's sake, we accept
the atheistic theory, there is still no cause for lamentation. Apart
from the separate existence of the soul, the material elements remain
unmanifested before creation. From this subtle state of unmanifestation
comes manifestation, just as from ether, air is generated; from air,
fire is generated; from fire, water is generated; and from water, earth
becomes manifested. From the earth, many varieties of manifestations
take place. Take, for example, a big skyscraper manifested from the
earth. When it is dismantled, the manifestation becomes again
unmanifested and remains as atoms in the ultimate stage. The law of
conservation of energy remains, but in course of time things are
manifested and unmanifested--that is the difference. Then what cause is
there for lamentation either in the stage of manifestation or in
unmanifestation? Somehow or other, even in the unmanifested stage,
things are not lost. Both at the beginning and at the end, all elements
remain unmanifested, and only in the middle are they manifested, and
this does not make any real material difference.
And if we accept the Vedic conclusion as stated in the Bhagavad-gita
(antavanta ime dehah) that these material bodies are perishable in due
course of time (nityasyoktah saririnah) but that the soul is eternal,
then we must remember always that the body is like a dress; therefore
why lament the changing of a dress? The material body has no factual
existence in relation to the eternal soul. It is something like a
dream. In a dream we may think of flying in the sky, or sitting on a
chariot as a king, but when we wake up we can see that we are neither
in the sky nor seated on the chariot. The Vedic wisdom encourages self-
realization on the basis of the nonexistence of the material body.
Therefore, in either case, whether one believes in the existence of the
soul, or one does not believe in the existence of the soul, there is no
cause for lamentation for loss of the body.
TEXT 29
ascarya-vat pasyati kascid enam
ascarya-vad vadati tathaiva canyah
ascarya-vac cainam anyah srnoti
srutvapy enam veda na caiva kascit
SYNONYMS
ascarya-vat--amazing; pasyati--see; kascit--some; enam--this soul;
ascarya-vat--amazing; vadati--speak; tatha--there; eva--certainly; ca--
also; anyah--another; ascarya-vat--similarly amazing; ca--also; enam--
this soul; anyah--others; srnoti--hear; srutva--having heard; api--
even; enam--this soul; veda--do know; na--never; ca--and; eva--
certainly; kascit--anyone.
TRANSLATION
Some look at the soul as amazing, some describe him as amazing, and
some hear of him as amazing, while others, even after hearing about
him, cannot understand him at all.
PURPORT
Since Gitopanisad is largely based on the principles of the Upanisads,
it is not surprising to also find this passage in the Katha Upanisad
(1.2.7):
sravanayapi bahubhir yo na labhyah
srnvanto 'pi bahavo yam na vidyuh
ascaryo vakta kusalo 'sya labdha
ascaryo 'sya jnata kusalanusistah
The fact that the atomic soul is within the body of a gigantic animal,
in the body of a gigantic banyan tree, and also in the microbic germs,
millions and billions of which occupy only an inch of space, is
certainly very amazing. Men with a poor fund of knowledge and men who
are not austere cannot understand the wonders of the individual atomic
spark of spirit, even though it is explained by the greatest authority
of knowledge, who imparted lessons even to Brahma, the first living
being in the universe. Owing to a gross material conception of things,
most men in this age cannot imagine how such a small particle can
become both so great and so small. So men look at the soul proper as
wonderful either by constitution or by description. Illusioned by the
material energy, people are so engrossed in subject matter for sense
gratification that they have very little time to understand the
question of self-understanding, even though it is a fact that without
this self-understanding all activities result in ultimate defeat in the
struggle for existence. Perhaps one has no idea that one must think of
the soul, and thus make a solution of the material miseries.
Some people who are inclined to hear about the soul may be attending
lectures, in good association, but sometimes, owing to ignorance, they
are misguided by acceptance of the Supersoul and the atomic soul as one
without distinction of magnitude. It is very difficult to find a man
who perfectly understands the position of the soul, the Supersoul, the
atomic soul, their respective functions, relationships and all other
major and minor details. And it is still more difficult to find a man
who has actually derived full benefit from knowledge of the soul, and
who is able to describe the position of the soul in different aspects.
But if, somehow or other, one is able to understand the subject matter
of the soul, then one's life is successful. The easiest process for
understanding the subject matter of self, however, is to accept the
statements of the Bhagavad-gita spoken by the greatest authority, Lord
Krsna, without being deviated by other theories. But it also requires a
great deal of penance and sacrifice, either in this life or in the
previous ones, before one is able to accept Krsna as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Krsna can, however, be known as such by the
causeless mercy of the pure devotee and by no other way.
TEXT 30
dehi nityam avadhyo 'yam
dehe sarvasya bharata
tasmat sarvani bhutani
na tvam socitum arhasi
SYNONYMS
dehi--the owner of the material body; nityam--eternally; avadhyah--
cannot be killed; ayam--this soul; dehe--in the body; sarvasya--of
everyone; bharata--O descendant of Bharata; tasmat--therefore; sarvani-
-all; bhutani--living entities (that are born); na--never; tvam--
yourself; socitum--to lament; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATION
O descendant of Bharata, he who dwells in the body is eternal and can
never be slain. Therefore you need not grieve for any creature.
PURPORT
The Lord now concludes the chapter of instruction on the immutable
spirit soul. In describing the immortal soul in various ways, Lord
Krsna establishes that the soul is immortal and the body is temporary.
Therefore Arjuna as a ksatriya should not abandon his duty out of fear
that his grandfather and teacher--Bhisma and Drona--will die in the
battle. On the authority of Sri Krsna, one has to believe that there is
a soul different from the material body, not that there is no such
thing as soul, or that living symptoms develop at a certain stage of
material maturity resulting from the interaction of chemicals. Though
the soul is immortal, violence is not encouraged, but at the time of
war it is not discouraged when there is actual need for it. That need
must be justified in terms of the sanction of the Lord, and not
capriciously.
TEXT 31
sva-dharmam api caveksya
na vikampitum arhasi
dharmyad dhi yuddhac chreyo 'nyat
ksatriyasya na vidyate
SYNONYMS
sva-dharmam--one's own religious principles; api--also; ca--indeed;
aveksya--considering; na--never; vikampitum--to hesitate; arhasi--you
deserve; dharmyat--from religious principles; hi--indeed; yuddhat--than
fighting; 
sreyah--better 
engagements; 
anyat--anything 
else;
ksatriyasya--of the ksatriya; na--does not; vidyate--exist.
TRANSLATION
Considering your specific duty as a ksatriya, you should know that
there is no better engagement for you than fighting on religious
principles; and so there is no need for hesitation.
PURPORT
Out of the four orders of social administration, the second order, for
the matter of good administration, is called ksatriya. Ksat means hurt.
One who gives protection from harm is called ksatriya (trayate--to give
protection). The ksatriyas are trained for killing in the forest. A
ksatriya would go into the forest and challenge a tiger face to face
and fight with the tiger with his sword. When the tiger was killed, it
would be offered the royal order of cremation. This system is being
followed even up to the present day by the ksatriya kings of the Jaipur
state. The ksatriyas are specially trained for challenging and killing
because religious violence is sometimes a necessary factor. Therefore,
ksatriyas are never meant for accepting directly the order of sannyasa
or renunciation. Nonviolence in politics may be a diplomacy, but it is
never a factor or principle. In the religious law books it is stated:
ahavesu mitho 'nyonyam
jighamsanto mahi-ksitah
yuddhamanah param saktya
svargam yanty aparan-mukhah
yajnesu pasavo brahman
hanyante satatam dvijaih
samskrtah kila mantrais ca
te 'pi svargam avapnuvan
"In the battlefield, a king or ksatriya, while fighting another king
envious of him, is eligible for achieving heavenly planets after death,
as the brahmanas also attain the heavenly planets by sacrificing
animals in the sacrificial fire." Therefore, killing on the battlefield
on religious principles and the killing of animals in the sacrificial
fire are not at all considered to be acts of violence, because everyone
is benefited by the religious principles involved. The animal
sacrificed gets a human life immediately without undergoing the gradual
evolutionary process from one form to another, and the ksatriyas killed
in the battlefield also attain the heavenly planets as do the brahmanas
who attain them by offering sacrifice.
There are two kinds of sva-dharmas, specific duties. As long as one is
not liberated, one has to perform the duties of his particular body in
accordance with religious principles in order to achieve liberation.
When one is liberated, one's sva-dharma--specific duty--becomes
spiritual and is not in the material bodily concept. In the bodily
conception of life there are specific duties for the brahmanas and
ksatriyas respectively, and such duties are unavoidable. Sva-dharma is
ordained by the Lord, and this will be clarified in the Fourth Chapter.
On the bodily plane sva-dharma is called varnasrama-dharma, or man's
steppingstone for spiritual understanding. Human civilization begins
from the stage of varnasrama-dharma, or specific duties in terms of the
specific modes of nature of the body obtained. Discharging one's
specific duty in any field of action in accordance with varnasrama-
dharma serves to elevate one to a higher status of life.
TEXT 32
yadrcchaya copapannam
svarga-dvaram apavrtam
sukhinah ksatriyah partha
labhante yuddham idrsam
SYNONYMS
yadrcchaya--by its own accord; ca--also; upapannam--arrived at; svarga-
-heavenly planet; dvaram--door; apavrtam--wide open; sukhinah--very
happy; ksatriyah--the members of the royal order; partha--O son of
Prtha; labhante--do achieve; yuddham--war; idrsam--like this.
TRANSLATION
O Partha, happy are the ksatriyas to whom such fighting opportunities
come unsought, opening for them the doors of the heavenly planets.
PURPORT
As supreme teacher of the world, Lord Krsna condemns the attitude of
Arjuna who said, "I do not find any good in this fighting. It will
cause perpetual habitation in hell." Such statements by Arjuna were due
to ignorance only. He wanted to become nonviolent in the discharge of
his specific duty. For a ksatriya to be in the battlefield and to
become nonviolent is the philosophy of fools. In the Parasara-smrti, or
religious codes made by Parasara, the great sage and father of
Vyasadeva, it is stated:
ksatriyo hi praja raksan
sastra-panih pradandayan
nirjitya para-sainyadi
ksitim dharmena palayet
"The ksatriya's duty is to protect the citizens from all kinds of
difficulties, and for that reason he has to apply violence in suitable
cases for law and order. Therefore he has to conquer the soldiers of
inimical kings, and thus, with religious principles, he should rule
over the world."
Considering all aspects, Arjuna had no reason to refrain from fighting.
If he should conquer his enemies, he would enjoy the kingdom; and if he
should die in the battle, he would be elevated to the heavenly planets
whose doors were wide open to him. Fighting would be for his benefit in
either case.
TEXT 33
atha cet tvam imam dharmyam
sangramam na karisyasi
tatah sva-dharmam kirtim ca
hitva papam avapsyasi
SYNONYMS
atha--therefore; cet--if; tvam--you; imam--this; dharmyam--religious
duty; sangramam--fighting; na--do not; karisyasi--perform; tatah--then;
sva-dharmam--your religious duty; kirtim--reputation; ca--also; hitva--
losing; papam--sinful reaction; avapsyasi--do gain.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you do not fight this religious war, then you will
certainly incur sins for neglecting your duties and thus lose your
reputation as a fighter.
PURPORT
Arjuna was a famous fighter, and he attained fame by fighting many
great demigods, including even Lord Siva. After fighting and defeating
Lord Siva in the dress of a hunter, Arjuna pleased the lord and
received as a reward a weapon called pasupata-astra. Everyone knew that
he was a great warrior. Even Dronacarya gave him benedictions and
awarded him the special weapon by which he could kill even his teacher.
So he was credited with so many military certificates from many
authorities, including his adopted father Indra, the heavenly king. But
if he abandoned the battle, he would not only neglect his specific duty
as a ksatriya, but he would lose all fame and good name and thus
prepare his royal road to hell. In other words, he would go to hell,
not by fighting, but by withdrawing from battle.
TEXT 34
akirtim capi bhutani
kathayisyanti te 'vyayam
sambhavitasya cakirtir
maranad atiricyate
SYNONYMS
akirtim--infamy; ca--also; api--over and above; bhutani--all people;
kathayisyanti--will speak; te--of you; avyayam--forever; sambhavitasya-
-for a respectable man; ca--also; akirtih--ill fame; maranat--than
death; atiricyate--becomes more than.
TRANSLATION
People will always speak of your infamy, and for one who has been
honored, dishonor is worse than death.
PURPORT
Both as a friend and philosopher to Arjuna, Lord Krsna now gives His
final judgment regarding Arjuna's refusal to fight. The Lord says,
"Arjuna, if you leave the battlefield, people will call you a coward
even before your actual fight. And if you think that people may call
you bad names but that you will save your life by fleeing the
battlefield, then My advice is that you'd better die in the battle. For
a respectable man like you, ill fame is worse than death. So, you
should not flee for fear of your life; better die in the battle. That
will save you from the ill fame of misusing My friendship and losing
your prestige in society."
So, the final judgment of the Lord was for Arjuna to die in the battle
and not withdraw.
TEXT 35
bhayad ranad uparatam
mamsyante tvam maha-rathah
yesam ca tvam bahu-mato
bhutva yasyasi laghavam
SYNONYMS
bhayat--out of fear; ranat--from the battlefield; uparatam--ceased;
mamsyante--will consider; tvam--unto you; maha-rathah--the great
generals; yesam--of those who; ca--also; tvam--you; bahu-matah--in
great estimation; bhutva--will become; yasyasi--will go; laghavam--
decreased in value.
TRANSLATION
The great generals who have highly esteemed your name and fame will
think that you have left the battlefield out of fear only, and thus
they will consider you a coward.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna continued to give His verdict to Arjuna: "Do not think that
the great generals like Duryodhana, Karna, and other contemporaries
will think that you have left the battlefield out of compassion for
your brothers and grandfather. They will think that you have left out
of fear for your life. And thus their high estimation of your
personality will go to hell."
TEXT 36
avacya-vadams ca bahun
vadisyanti tavahitah
nindantas tava samarthyam
tato duhkhataram nu kim
SYNONYMS
avacya--unkind; vadan--fabricated words; ca--also; bahun--many;
vadisyanti--will say; tava--your; ahitah--enemies; nindantah--while
vilifying; tava--your; samarthyam--ability; tatah--thereafter; duhkha-
taram--more painful; nu--of course; kim--what is there.
TRANSLATION
Your enemies will describe you in many unkind words and scorn your
ability. What could be more painful for you?
PURPORT
Lord Krsna was astonished in the beginning at Arjuna's uncalled-for
plea for compassion, and He described his compassion as befitting the
non-Aryans. Now in so many words, He has proved His statements against
Arjuna's so-called compassion.
TEXT 37
hato va prapsyasi svargam
jitva va bhoksyase mahim
tasmad uttistha kaunteya
yuddhaya krta-niscayah
SYNONYMS
hatah--being killed; va--either; prapsyasi--you will gain; svargam--the
heavenly kingdom; jitva--by conquering; va--or; bhoksyase--you enjoy;
mahim--the world; tasmat--therefore; uttistha--get up; kaunteya--O son
of Kunti; yuddhaya--to fight; krta--determined; niscayah--uncertainty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti, either you will be killed on the battlefield and attain
the heavenly planets, or you will conquer and enjoy the earthly
kingdom. Therefore get up and fight with determination.
PURPORT
Even though there was no certainty of victory for Arjuna's side, he
still had to fight; for, even being killed there, he could be elevated
into the heavenly planets.
TEXT 38
sukha-duhkhe same krtva
labhalabhau jayajayau
tato yuddhaya yujyasva
naivam papam avapsyasi
SYNONYMS
sukha--happiness; duhkhe--in distress; same--in equanimity; krtva--
doing so; labha-alabhau--both in loss and profit; jaya-ajayau--both in
defeat and victory; tatah--thereafter; yuddhaya--for the sake of
fighting; yujyasva--do fight; na--never; evam--in this way; papam--
sinful reaction; avapsyasi--you will gain.
TRANSLATION
Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness
or distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat--and, by so doing, you
shall never incur sin.
PURPORT
Lord Krsna now directly says that Arjuna should fight for the sake of
fighting because He desires the battle. There is no consideration of
happiness or distress, profit or gain, victory or defeat in the
activities of Krsna consciousness. That everything should be performed
for the sake of Krsna is transcendental consciousness; so there is no
reaction to material activities. He who acts for his own sense
gratification, either in goodness or in passion, is subject to the
reaction, good or bad. But he who has completely surrendered himself in
the activities of Krsna consciousness is no longer obliged to anyone,
nor is he a debtor to anyone, as one is in the ordinary course of
activities. It is said:
devarsi-bhutapta-nrnam pitrnam
na kinkaro nayam rni ca rajan
sarvatmana yah saranam saranyam
gato mukundam parihrtya kartam
"Anyone who has completely surrendered unto Krsna, Mukunda, giving up
all other duties, is no longer a debtor, nor is he obliged to anyone--
not the demigods, nor the sages, nor the people in general, nor
kinsmen, nor humanity, nor forefathers." (Bhag. 11.5.41) That is the
indirect hint given by Krsna to Arjuna in this verse, and the matter
will be more clearly explained in the following verses.
TEXT 39
esa te 'bhihita sankhye
buddhir yoge tv imam srnu
buddhya yukto yaya partha
karma-bandham prahasyasi
SYNONYMS
esa--all these; te--unto you; abhihita--described; sankhye--by
analytical study; buddhih--intelligence; yoge--work without fruitive
result; tu--but; imam--this; srnu--just hear; buddhya--by intelligence;
yuktah--dovetailed; yaya--by which; partha--O son of Prtha; karma-
bandham--bondage of reaction; prahasyasi--you can be released from.
TRANSLATION
Thus far I have declared to you the analytical knowledge of sankhya
philosophy. Now listen to the knowledge of yoga whereby one works
without fruitive result. O son of Prtha, when you act by such
intelligence, you can free yourself from the bondage of works.
PURPORT
According to the Nirukti, or the Vedic dictionary, sankhya means that
which describes phenomena in detail, and sankhya refers to that
philosophy which describes the real nature of the soul. And yoga
involves controlling the senses. Arjuna's proposal not to fight was
based on sense gratification. Forgetting his prime duty, he wanted to
cease fighting because he thought by not killing his relatives and
kinsmen he would be happier than by enjoying the kingdom by conquering
his cousins and brothers, the sons of Dhrtarastra. In both ways, the
basic principles were for sense gratification. Happiness derived from
conquering them and happiness derived by seeing kinsmen alive are both
on the basis of personal sense gratification, for there is a sacrifice
of wisdom and duty. Krsna, therefore, wanted to explain to Arjuna that
by killing the body of his grandfather he would not be killing the soul
proper, and He explained that all individual persons, including the
Lord Himself, are eternal individuals; they were individuals in the
past, they are individuals in the present, and they will continue to
remain individuals in the future, because all of us are individual
souls eternally, and we simply change our bodily dress in different
manners. But, actually, we keep our individuality even after liberation
from the bondage of material dress. An analytical study of the soul and
the body has been very graphically explained by Lord Krsna. And this
descriptive knowledge of the soul and the body from different angles of
vision has been described here as Sankhya, in terms of the Nirukti
dictionary. This Sankhya has nothing to do with the Sankhya philosophy
of the atheist Kapila. Long before the imposter Kapila's Sankhya, the
Sankhya philosophy was expounded in the Srimad-Bhagavatam by the true
Lord Kapila, the incarnation of Lord Krsna, who explained it to His
mother, Devahuti. It is clearly explained by Him that the purusa, or
the Supreme Lord, is active and that He creates by looking over the
prakrti. This is accepted in the Vedas and in the Gita. The description
in the Vedas indicates that the Lord glanced over the prakrti, or
nature, and impregnated it with atomic individual souls. All these
individuals are working in the material world for sense gratification,
and under the spell of material energy they are thinking of being
enjoyers. This mentality is dragged to the last point of liberation
when the living entity wants to become one with the Lord. This is the
last snare of maya or sense gratificatory illusion, and it is only
after many, many births of such sense gratificatory activities that a
great soul surrenders unto Vasudeva, Lord Krsna, thereby fulfilling the
search after the ultimate truth.
Arjuna has already accepted Krsna as his spiritual master by
surrendering himself unto Him: sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam.
Consequently, Krsna will now tell him about the working process in
buddhi-yoga, or karma-yoga, or in other words, the practice of
devotional service only for the sense gratification of the Lord. This
buddhi-yoga is clearly explained in Chapter Ten, verse ten, as being
direct communion with the Lord, who is sitting as Paramatma in
everyone's heart. But such communion does not take place without
devotional service. One who is therefore situated in devotional or
transcendental loving service to the Lord, or, in other words, in Krsna
consciousness, attains to this stage of buddhi-yoga by the special
grace of the Lord. The Lord says, therefore, that only to those who are
always engaged in devotional service out of transcendental love does He
award the pure knowledge of devotion in love. In that way the devotee
can reach Him easily in the ever-blissful kingdom of God.
Thus the buddhi-yoga mentioned in this verse is the devotional service
of the Lord, and the word Sankhya mentioned herein has nothing to do
with the atheistic sankhya-yoga enunciated by the imposter Kapila. One
should not, therefore, misunderstand that the sankhya-yoga mentioned
herein has any connection with the atheistic Sankhya. Nor did that
philosophy have any influence during that time; nor would Lord Krsna
care to mention such godless philosophical speculations. Real Sankhya
philosophy is described by Lord Kapila in the Srimad-Bhagavatam, but
even that Sankhya has nothing to do with the current topics. Here,
Sankhya means analytical description of the body and the soul. Lord
Krsna made an analytical description of the soul just to bring Arjuna
to the point of buddhi-yoga, or bhakti-yoga. Therefore, Lord Krsna's
Sankhya and Lord Kapila's Sankhya, as described in the Bhagavatam, are
one and the same. They are all bhakti-yoga. He said, therefore, that
only the less intelligent class of men make a distinction between
sankhya-yoga and bhakti-yoga.
Of course, atheistic sankhya-yoga has nothing to do with bhakti-yoga,
yet the unintelligent claim that the atheistic sankhya-yoga is referred
to in the Bhagavad-gita.
One should therefore understand that buddhi-yoga means to work in Krsna
consciousness, in the full bliss and knowledge of devotional service.
One who works for the satisfaction of the Lord only, however difficult
such work may be, is working under the principles of buddhi-yoga and
finds himself always in transcendental bliss. By such transcendental
engagement, one achieves all transcendental qualities automatically, by
the grace of the Lord, and thus his liberation is complete in itself,
without his making extraneous endeavors to acquire knowledge. There is
much difference between work in Krsna consciousness and work for
fruitive results, especially in the matter of sense gratification for
achieving results in terms of family or material happiness. Buddhi-yoga
is therefore the transcendental quality of the work that we perform.
TEXT 40
nehabhikrama-naso 'sti
pratyavayo na vidyate
sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya
trayate mahato bhayat
SYNONYMS
na--there is not; iha--in this world; abhikrama--endeavoring; nasah--
loss; asti--there is; pratyavayah--diminution; na--never; vidyate--
there is; su-alpam--a little; api--although; asya--of this; dharmasya--
of this occupation; trayate--releases; mahatah--of very great; bhayat--
danger.
TRANSLATION
In this endeavor there is no loss or diminution, and a little
advancement on this path can protect one from the most dangerous type
of fear.
PURPORT
Activity in Krsna consciousness, or acting for the benefit of Krsna
without expectation of sense gratification, is the highest
transcendental quality of work. Even a small beginning of such activity
finds no impediment, nor can that small beginning be lost at any stage.
Any work begun on the material plane has to be completed, otherwise the
whole attempt becomes a failure. But any work begun in Krsna
consciousness has a permanent effect, even though not finished. The
performer of such work is therefore not at a loss even if his work in
Krsna consciousness is incomplete. One percent done in Krsna
consciousness bears permanent results, so that the next beginning is
from the point of two percent; whereas, in material activity, without a
hundred percent success, there is no profit. Ajamila performed his duty
in some percentage of Krsna consciousness, but the result he enjoyed at
the end was a hundred percent, by the grace of the Lord. There is a
nice verse in this connection in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17):
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kim
ko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone gives up self-gratificatory pursuits and works in Krsna
consciousness and then falls down on account of not completing his
work, what loss is there on his part? And, what can one gain if one
performs his material activities perfectly?" Or, as the Christians say,
"What profiteth a man if he gain the whole world yet suffers the loss
of his eternal soul?"
Material activities and their results end with the body. But work in
Krsna consciousness carries a person again to Krsna consciousness, even
after the loss of the body. At least one is sure to have a chance in
the next life of being born again as a human being, either in the
family of a great cultured brahmana or in a rich aristocratic family
that will give one a further chance for elevation. That is the unique
quality of work done in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 41
vyavasayatmika buddhir
ekeha kuru-nandana
bahu-sakha hy anantas ca
buddhayo 'vyavasayinam
SYNONYMS
vyavasaya-atmika--resolute Krsna consciousness; buddhih--intelligence;
eka--only one; iha--in this world; kuru-nandana--O beloved child of the
Kurus; bahu-sakhah--various branches; hi--indeed; anantah--unlimited;
ca--also; buddhayah--intelligence; avyavasayinam--of those who are not
in Krsna consciousness.
TRANSLATION
Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is
one. O beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are
irresolute is many-branched.
PURPORT
A strong faith in Krsna consciousness that one shall be elevated to the
highest perfection of life is called vyavasayatmika intelligence. The
Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.62) states:
'sraddha'-sabde----visvasa kahe sudrdha niscaya
krsne bhakti kaile sarva-karma krta haya
Faith means unflinching trust in something sublime. When one is engaged
in the duties of Krsna consciousness, he need not act in relationship
to the material world with obligations to family traditions, humanity,
or nationality. Fruitive activities are the engagements of one's
reactions from past good or bad deeds. When one is awake in Krsna
consciousness, he need no longer endeavor for good results in his
activities. When one is situated in Krsna consciousness, all activities
are on the absolute plane, for they are no longer subject to dualities
like good and bad. The highest perfection of Krsna consciousness is
renunciation of the material conception of life. This state is
automatically achieved by progressive Krsna consciousness. The resolute
purpose of a person in Krsna consciousness is based on knowledge,
Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah, by which one comes to
know perfectly that Vasudeva, or Krsna is the root of all manifested
causes. As water on the root of a tree is automatically distributed to
the leaves and branches, in Krsna consciousness one can render the
highest service to everyone--namely self, family, society, country,
humanity, etc. If Krsna is satisfied by one's actions, then everyone
will be satisfied.
Service in Krsna consciousness is, however, best practiced under the
able guidance of a spiritual master who is a bona fide representative
of Krsna, who knows the nature of the student and who can guide him to
act in Krsna consciousness. As such, to be well-versed in Krsna
consciousness one has to act firmly and obey the representative of
Krsna, and one should accept the instruction of the bona fide spiritual
master as one's mission in life. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura
instructs us, in his famous prayers for the spiritual master as
follows:
yasya prasadad bhagavat-prasado
yasyaprasadan na gatih kuto 'pi
dhyayan stuvams tasya yasas tri-sandhyam
vande guroh sri-caranaravindam
"By satisfaction of the spiritual master, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead becomes satisfied. And by not satisfying the spiritual master,
there is no chance of being promoted to the plane of Krsna
consciousness. I should, therefore, meditate and pray for his mercy
three times a day, and offer my respectful obeisances unto him, my
spiritual master."
The whole process, however, depends on perfect knowledge of the soul
beyond the conception of the body--not theoretically but practically,
when there is no longer a chance for sense gratification manifested in
fruitive activities. One who is not firmly fixed in mind is diverted by
various types of fruitive acts.
TEXTS 42-43
yam imam puspitam vacam
pravadanty avipascitah
veda-vada-ratah partha
nanyad astiti vadinah
kamatmanah svarga-para
janma-karma-phala-pradam
kriya-visesa-bahulam
bhogaisvarya-gatim prati
SYNONYMS
yam imam--all these; puspitam--flowery; vacam--words; pravadanti--say;
avipascitah--men with a poor fund of knowledge; veda-vada-ratah--
supposed followers of the Vedas; partha--O son of Prtha; na--never;
anyat--anything else; asti--there is; iti--thus; vadinah--advocates;
kama-atmanah--desirous of sense gratification; svarga-parah--aiming to
achieve heavenly planets; janma-karma-phala-pradam--resulting in
fruitive actions, good birth, etc.; kriya-visesa--pompous ceremonies;
bahulam--various; bhoga--sense enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; gatim--
progress; prati--towards.
TRANSLATION
Men of small knowledge are very much attached to the flowery words of
the Vedas, which recommend various fruitive activities for elevation to
heavenly planets, resultant good birth, power, and so forth. Being
desirous of sense gratification and opulent life, they say that there
is nothing more than this.
PURPORT
People in general are not very intelligent, and due to their ignorance
they are most attached to the fruitive activities recommended in the
karma-kanda portions of the Vedas. They do not want anything more than
sense gratificatory proposals for enjoying life in heaven, where wine
and women are available and material opulence is very common. In the
Vedas many sacrifices are recommended for elevation to the heavenly
planets, especially the jyotistoma sacrifices. In fact, it is stated
that anyone desiring elevation to heavenly planets must perform these
sacrifices, and men with a poor fund of knowledge think that this is
the whole purpose of Vedic wisdom. It is very difficult for such
inexperienced persons to be situated in the determined action of Krsna
consciousness. As fools are attached to the flowers of poisonous trees
without knowing the results of such attractions, similarly
unenlightened men are attracted by such heavenly opulence and the sense
enjoyment thereof.
In the karma-kanda section of the Vedas it is said that those who
perform the four monthly penances become eligible to drink the somarasa
beverages to become immortal and happy forever. Even on this earth some
are very eager to have somarasa to become strong and fit to enjoy sense
gratifications. Such persons have no faith in liberation from material
bondage, and they are very much attached to the pompous ceremonies of
Vedic sacrifices. They are generally sensual, and they do not want
anything other than the heavenly pleasures of life. It is understood
that there are gardens called Nandana-kanana in which there is good
opportunity for association with angelic, beautiful women and having a
profuse supply of somarasa wine. Such bodily happiness is certainly
sensual; therefore there are those who are purely attached to material,
temporary happiness, as lords of the material world.
TEXT 44
bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
tayapahrta-cetasam
vyavasayatmika buddhih
samadhau na vidhiyate
SYNONYMS
bhoga--material enjoyment; aisvarya--opulence; prasaktanam--those who
are so attached; taya--by such things; apahrta-cetasam--bewildered in
mind; vyavasaya-atmika--fixed determination; buddhih--devotional
service of the Lord; samadhau--in the controlled mind; na--never;
vidhiyate--does take place.
TRANSLATION
In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and
material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute
determination of devotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take
place.
PURPORT
Samadhi means "fixed mind." The Vedic dictionary, the Nirukti, says,
samyag adhiyate 'sminn atma-tattva-yathatmyam: "When the mind is fixed
for understanding the self, it is called samadhi." Samadhi is never
possible for persons interested in material sense enjoyment, nor for
those who are bewildered by such temporary things. They are more or
less condemned by the process of material energy.
TEXT 45
trai-gunya-visaya veda
nistrai-gunyo bhavarjuna
nirdvandvo nitya-sattva-stho
niryoga-ksema atmavan
SYNONYMS
trai-gunya--pertaining to the three modes of material nature; visayah--
on the subject matter; vedah--Vedic literatures; nistrai-gunyah--in a
pure state of spiritual existence; bhava--be; arjuna--O Arjuna;
nirdvandvah--free from the pains of opposites; nitya-sattva-sthah--ever
remaining in sattva (goodness); niryoga-ksemah--free from (the thought
of) acquisition and preservation; atma-van--established in the self.
TRANSLATION
The Vedas mainly deal with the subject of the three modes of material
nature. Rise above these modes, O Arjuna. Be transcendental to all of
them. Be free from all dualities and from all anxieties for gain and
safety, and be established in the self.
PURPORT
All material activities involve actions and reactions in the three
modes of material nature. They are meant for fruitive results, which
cause bondage in the material world. The Vedas deal mostly with
fruitive activities to gradually elevate the general public from the
field of sense gratification to a position on the transcendental plane.
Arjuna, as a student and friend of Lord Krsna, is advised to raise
himself to the transcendental position of Vedanta philosophy where, in
the beginning, there is brahma-jijnasa, or questions on the supreme
transcendence. All the living entities who are in the material world
are struggling very hard for existence. For them the Lord, after
creation of the material world, gave the Vedic wisdom advising how to
live and get rid of the material entanglement. When the activities for
sense gratification, namely the karma-kanda chapter, are finished, then
the chance for spiritual realization is offered in the form of the
Upanisads, which are part of different Vedas, as the Bhagavad-gita is a
part of the fifth Veda, namely the Mahabharata. The Upanisads mark the
beginning of transcendental life.
As long as the material body exists, there are actions and reactions in
the material modes. One has to learn tolerance in the face of dualities
such as happiness and distress, or cold and warmth, and by tolerating
such dualities become free from anxieties regarding gain and loss. This
transcendental position is achieved in full Krsna consciousness when
one is fully dependent on the good will of Krsna.
TEXT 46
yavan artha udapane
sarvatah samplutodake
tavan sarvesu vedesu
brahmanasya vijanatah
SYNONYMS
yavan--all that; arthah--is meant; uda-pane--in a well of water;
sarvatah--in all respects; sampluta-udake--in a great reservoir of
water; tavan--similarly; sarvesu--in all; vedesu--Vedic literatures;
brahmanasya--of the man who knows the Supreme Brahman; vijanatah--of
one who is in complete knowledge.
TRANSLATION
All purposes that are served by the small pond can at once be served by
the great reservoirs of water. Similarly, all the purposes of the Vedas
can be served to one who knows the purpose behind them.
PURPORT
The rituals and sacrifices mentioned in the karma-kanda division of the
Vedic literature are to encourage gradual development of self-
realization. And the purpose of self-realization is clearly stated in
the Fifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (15.15): the purpose of
studying the Vedas is to know Lord Krsna, the primeval cause of
everything. So, self-realization means understanding Krsna and one's
eternal relationship with Him. The relationship of the living entities
with Krsna is also mentioned in the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita
(15.7). The living entities are parts and parcels of Krsna; therefore,
revival of Krsna consciousness by the individual living entity is the
highest perfectional stage of Vedic knowledge. This is confirmed in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.33.7) as follows:
aho bata sva-paco 'to gariyan
yaj-jihvagre vartate nama tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuh sasnur arya
brahmanucur nama grnanti ye te
"O my Lord, a person who is chanting Your holy name, although born of a
low family like that of a candala [dog-eater] is situated on the
highest platform of self-realization. Such a person must have performed
all kinds of penances and sacrifices according to Vedic rituals and
studied the Vedic literatures many, many times after taking his bath in
all the holy places of pilgrimage. Such a person is considered to be
the best of the Aryan family."
So one must be intelligent enough to understand the purpose of the
Vedas, without being attached to the rituals only, and must not desire
to be elevated to the heavenly kingdoms for a better quality of sense
gratification. It is not possible for the common man in this age to
follow all the rules and regulations of Vedic rituals and the
injunctions of the Vedanta and the Upanisads. It requires much time,
energy, knowledge and resources to execute the purposes of the Vedas.
This is hardly possible in this age. The best purpose of Vedic culture
is served, however, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, as
recommended by Lord Caitanya, the deliverer of all fallen souls. When
Lord Caitanya was asked by a great Vedic scholar, Prakasananda
Sarasvati, why He, the Lord, was chanting the holy name of the Lord
like a sentimentalist instead of studying Vedanta philosophy, the Lord
replied that His spiritual master found Him to be a great fool and thus
asked Him to chant the holy name of Lord Krsna. He did so, and became
ecstatic like a madman. In this Age of Kali, most of the population is
foolish and not adequately educated to understand Vedanta philosophy;
the best purpose of Vedanta philosophy is served by inoffensively
chanting the holy name of the Lord. Vedanta is the last word in Vedic
wisdom, and the author and knower of the Vedanta philosophy is Lord
Krsna; and the highest Vedantist is the great soul who takes pleasure
in chanting the holy name of the Lord. That is the ultimate purpose of
all Vedic mysticism.
TEXT 47
karmany evadhikaras te
ma phalesu kadacana
ma karma-phala-hetur bhur
ma te sango 'stv akarmani
SYNONYMS
karmani--prescribed duties; eva--certainly; adhikarah--right; te--of
you; ma--never; phalesu--in the fruits; kadacana--at any time; ma--
never; karma-phala--in the result of the work; hetuh--cause; bhuh--
become; ma--never; te--of you; sangah--attachment; astu--be there;
akarmani--in not doing.
TRANSLATION
You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not
entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the
cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not
doing your duty.
PURPORT
There are three considerations here: prescribed duties, capricious
work, and inaction. Prescribed duties refer to activities performed
while one is in the modes of material nature. Capricious work means
actions without the sanction of authority, and inaction means not
performing one's prescribed duties. The Lord advised that Arjuna not be
inactive, but that he perform his prescribed duty without being
attached to the result. One who is attached to the result of his work
is also the cause of the action. Thus he is the enjoyer or sufferer of
the result of such actions.
As far as prescribed duties are concerned, they can be fitted into
three subdivisions, namely routine work, emergency work and desired
activities. Routine work, in terms of the scriptural injunctions, is
done without desire for results. As one has to do it, obligatory work
is action in the mode of goodness. Work with results becomes the cause
of bondage; therefore such work is not auspicious. Everyone has his
proprietary right in regard to prescribed duties, but should act
without attachment to the result; such disinterested obligatory duties
doubtlessly lead one to the path of liberation.
Arjuna was therefore advised by the Lord to fight as a matter of duty
without attachment to the result. His nonparticipation in the battle is
another side of attachment. Such attachment never leads one to the path
of salvation. Any attachment, positive or negative, is cause for
bondage. Inaction is sinful. Therefore, fighting as a matter of duty
was the only auspicious path of salvation for Arjuna.
TEXT 48
yoga-sthah kuru karmani
sangam tyaktva dhananjaya
siddhy-asiddhyoh samo bhutva
samatvam yoga ucyate
SYNONYMS
yoga-sthah--steadfast in yoga; kuru--perform; karmani--your duties;
sangam--attachment; 
tyaktva--having 
abandoned; 
dhananjaya--O
Dhananjaya; siddhi-asiddhyoh--success and failure; samah--the same;
bhutva--having become; samatvam--evenness of mind; yogah--yoga; ucyate-
-is called.
TRANSLATION
Be steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all
attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.
PURPORT
Krsna tells Arjuna that he should act in yoga. And what is that yoga?
Yoga means to concentrate the mind upon the Supreme by controlling the
ever-disturbing senses. And who is the Supreme? The Supreme is the
Lord. And because He Himself is telling Arjuna to fight, Arjuna has
nothing to do with the results of the fight. Gain or victory are
Krsna's concern; Arjuna is simply advised to act according to the
dictation of Krsna. The following of Krsna's dictation is real yoga,
and this is practiced in the process called Krsna consciousness. By
Krsna consciousness only can one give up the sense of proprietorship.
One has to become the servant of Krsna, or the servant of the servant
of Krsna. That is the right way to discharge duty in Krsna
consciousness, which alone can help one to act in yoga.
Arjuna is a ksatriya, and as such he is participating in the
varnasrama-dharma institution. It is said in the Visnu Purana that in
the varnasrama-dharma, the whole aim is to satisfy Visnu. No one should
satisfy himself, as is the rule in the material world, but one should
satisfy Krsna. So, unless one satisfies Krsna, one cannot correctly
observe the principles of varnasrama-dharma. Indirectly, Arjuna was
advised to act as Krsna told him.
TEXT 49
durena hy avaram karma
buddhi-yogad dhananjaya
buddhau saranam anviccha
krpanah phala-hetavah
SYNONYMS
durena--by discarding it at a long distance; hi--certainly; avaram--
abominable; karma--activities; buddhi-yogat--on the strength of Krsna
consciousness; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth; buddhau--in such
consciousness; saranam--full surrender; anviccha--desire; krpanah--the
misers; phala-hetavah--those desiring fruitive action.
TRANSLATION
O Dhananjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional
service, and surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want to
enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.
PURPORT
One who has actually come to understand one's constitutional position
as an eternal servitor of the Lord gives up all engagements save
working in Krsna consciousness. As already explained, buddhi-yoga means
transcendental loving service to the Lord. Such devotional service is
the right course of action for the living entity. Only misers desire to
enjoy the fruit of their own work just to be further entangled in
material bondage. Except for work in Krsna consciousness, all
activities are abominable because they continually bind the worker to
the cycle of birth and death. One should therefore never desire to be
the cause of work. Everything should be done in Krsna consciousness,
for the satisfaction of Krsna. Misers do not know how to utilize the
assets of riches which they acquire by good fortune or by hard labor.
One should spend all energies working in Krsna consciousness, and that
will make one's life successful. Like the misers, unfortunate persons
do not employ their human energy in the service of the Lord.
TEXT 50
buddhi-yukto jahatiha
ubhe sukrta-duskrte
tasmad yogaya yujyasva
yogah karmasu kausalam
SYNONYMS
buddhi-yuktah--one who is engaged in devotional service; jahati--can
get rid of; iha--in this life; ubhe--in both; sukrta-duskrte--in good
and bad results; tasmat--therefore; yogaya--for the sake of devotional
service; yujyasva--be so engaged; yogah--Krsna consciousness; karmasu--
in all activities; kausalam--art.
TRANSLATION
A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad
actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, O Arjuna, which
is the art of all work.
PURPORT
Since time immemorial each living entity has accumulated the various
reactions of his good and bad work. As such, he is continuously
ignorant of his real constitutional position. One's ignorance can be
removed by the instruction of the Bhagavad-gita which teaches one to
surrender unto Lord Sri Krsna in all respects and become liberated from
the chained victimization of action and reaction, birth after birth.
Arjuna is therefore advised to act in Krsna consciousness, the
purifying process of resultant action.
TEXT 51
karma-jam buddhi-yukta hi
phalam tyaktva manisinah
janma-bandha-vinirmuktah
padam gacchanty anamayam
SYNONYMS
karma-jam--because of fruitive activities; buddhi-yuktah--being done in
devotional service; hi--certainly; phalam--results; tyaktva--giving up;
manisinah--devotees who are great sages; janma-bandha--the bondage of
birth and death; vinirmuktah--liberated soul; padam--position;
gacchanti--reached; anamayam--without miseries.
TRANSLATION
The wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and
free themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing the
fruits of action in the material world. In this way they can attain
that state beyond all miseries.
PURPORT
The liberated living entities seek that place where there are no
material miseries. The Bhagavatam (10.14.58) says:
samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam
mahat-padam punya-yaso murareh
bhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padam
padam padam yad vipadam na tesam
"For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who
is the shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Mukunda or
the giver of mukti, the ocean of the material world is like the water
contained in a calf's hoofprint. param padam, or the place where there
are no material miseries, or Vaikuntha, is his goal, not the place
where there is danger in every step of life."
Owing to ignorance, one does not know that this material world is a
miserable place where there are dangers at every step. Out of ignorance
only, less intelligent persons try to adjust to the situation by
fruitive activities, thinking that the resultant actions will make them
happy. They do not know that no kind of material body anywhere within
the universe can give life without miseries. The miseries of life,
namely birth, death, old age and diseases, are present everywhere
within the material world. But one who understands his real
constitutional position as the eternal servitor of the Lord, and thus
knows the position of the Personality of Godhead, engages himself in
the transcendental loving service of the Lord. Consequently he becomes
qualified to enter into the Vaikuntha planets, where there is neither
material, miserable life nor the influence of time and death. To know
one's constitutional position means to know also the sublime position
of the Lord. One who wrongly thinks that the living entity's position
and the Lord's position are on the same level is to be understood to be
in darkness and therefore unable to engage himself in the devotional
service of the Lord. He becomes a lord himself and thus paves the way
for the repetition of birth and death. The one who, understanding that
his position is to serve, transfers himself to the service of the Lord,
at once becomes eligible for Vaikunthaloka. Service for the cause of
the Lord is called karma-yoga or buddhi-yoga, or in plain words,
devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 52
yada te moha-kalilam
buddhir vyatitarisyati
tada gantasi nirvedam
srotavyasya srutasya ca
SYNONYMS
yada--when; te--your; moha--illusory; kalilam--dense forest; buddhih--
transcendental service with intelligence; vyatitarisyati--surpasses;
tada--at that time; ganta asi--you shall go; nirvedam--callousness;
srotavyasya--all that is to be heard; srutasya--all that is already
heard; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
When your intelligence has passed out of the dense forest of delusion,
you shall become indifferent to all that has been heard and all that is
to be heard.
PURPORT
There are many good examples in the lives of the great devotees of the
Lord of those who became indifferent to the rituals of the Vedas simply
by devotional service to the Lord. When a person factually understands
Krsna and his relationship with Krsna, he naturally becomes completely
indifferent to the rituals of fruitive activities, even though an
experienced brahmana. Sri Madhavendra Puri, a great devotee and acarya
in the line of the devotees, says:
sandhya-vandana bhadram astu bhavato bhoh snana tubhyam namo
bho devah pitaras ca tarpana-vidhau naham ksamah ksamyatam
yatra kvapi nisadya yadava-kulottamasya kamsa-dvisah
smaram smaram agham harami tad alam manye kim anyena me
"O Lord, in my prayers three times a day, all glory to you. Bathing, I
offer my obeisances unto you. O demigods! O forefathers! Please excuse
me for my inability to offer you my respects. Now wherever I sit, I can
remember the great descendant of the Yadu dynasty [Krsna], the enemy of
Kamsa, and thereby I can free myself from all sinful bondage. I think
this is sufficient for me."
The Vedic rites and rituals are imperative for neophytes: comprehending
all kinds of prayer three times a day, taking a bath early in the
morning, offering respects to the forefathers, etc. But, when one is
fully in Krsna consciousness and is engaged in His transcendental
loving service, one becomes indifferent to all these regulative
principles because he has already attained perfection. If one can reach
the platform of understanding by service to the Supreme Lord Krsna, he
has no longer to execute different types of penances and sacrifices as
recommended in revealed scriptures. And, similarly, if one has not
understood that the purpose of the Vedas is to reach Krsna and simply
engages in the rituals, etc., then he is uselessly wasting time in such
engagements. Persons in Krsna consciousness transcend the limit of
sabda-brahma, or the range of the Vedas and Upanisads.
TEXT 53
sruti-vipratipanna te
yada sthasyati niscala
samadhav acala buddhis
tada yogam avapsyasi
SYNONYMS
sruti--Vedic revelation; vipratipanna--without being influenced by the
fruitive results of the Vedas; te--your; yada--when; sthasyati--
remains; niscala--unmoved; samadhau--in transcendental consciousness,
or Krsna consciousness; acala--unflinching; buddhih--intelligence;
tada--at that time; yogam--self-realization; avapsyasi--you will
achieve.
TRANSLATION
When your mind is no longer disturbed by the flowery language of the
Vedas, and when it remains fixed in the trance of self-realization,
then you will have attained the divine consciousness.
PURPORT
To say that one is in samadhi is to say that one has fully realized
Krsna consciousness; that is, one in full samadhi has realized Brahman,
Paramatma and Bhagavan. The highest perfection of self-realization is
to understand that one is eternally the servitor of Krsna and that
one's only business is to discharge one's duties in Krsna
consciousness. A Krsna conscious person, or unflinching devotee of the
Lord, should not be disturbed by the flowery language of the Vedas nor
be engaged in fruitive activities for promotion to the heavenly
kingdom. In Krsna consciousness, one comes directly into communion with
Krsna, and thus all directions from Krsna may be understood in that
transcendental state. One is sure to achieve results by such activities
and attain conclusive knowledge. One has only to carry out the orders
of Krsna or His representative, the spiritual master.
TEXT 54
arjuna uvaca
sthita-prajnasya ka bhasa
samadhi-sthasya kesava
sthita-dhih kim prabhaseta
kim asita vrajeta kim
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthita-prajnasya--of one who is situated in
fixed Krsna consciousness; ka--what; bhasa--language; samadhi-sthasya--
of one situated in trance; kesava--O Krsna; sthita-dhih--one fixed in
Krsna consciousness; kim--what; prabhaseta--speak; kim--how; asita--
does remain; vrajeta--walks; kim--how.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Krsna, what are the symptoms of one whose consciousness
is thus merged in transcendence? How does he speak, and what is his
language? How does he sit, and how does he walk?
PURPORT
As there are symptoms for each and every man, in terms of his
particular situation, similarly one who is Krsna conscious has his
particular nature--talking, walking, thinking, feeling, etc. As a rich
man has his symptoms by which he is known as a rich man, as a diseased
man has his symptoms, by which he is known as diseased, or as a learned
man has his symptoms, so a man in transcendental consciousness of Krsna
has specific symptoms in various dealings. One can know his specific
symptoms from the Bhagavad-gita. Most important is how the man in Krsna
consciousness speaks, for speech is the most important quality of any
man. It is said that a fool is undiscovered as long as he does not
speak, and certainly a well-dressed fool cannot be identified unless he
speaks, but as soon as he speaks, he reveals himself at once. The
immediate symptom of a Krsna conscious man is that he speaks only of
Krsna and of matters relating to Him. Other symptoms then automatically
follow, as stated below.
TEXT 55
sri-bhagavan uvaca
prajahati yada kaman
sarvan partha mano-gatan
atmany evatmana tustah
sthita-prajnas tadocyate
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prajahati-
-gives up; yada--when; kaman--desires for sense gratification; sarvan--
of all varieties; partha--O son of Prtha; manah-gatan--of mental
concoction; atmani--in the pure state of the soul; eva--certainly;
atmana--by the purified mind; tustah--satisfied; sthita-prajnah--
transcendentally situated; tada--at that time; ucyate--is said.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: O Partha, when a man gives up all varieties of
sense desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his mind
finds satisfaction in the self alone, then he is said to be in pure
transcendental consciousness.
PURPORT
The Bhagavatam affirms that any person who is fully in Krsna
consciousness, or devotional service of the Lord, has all the good
qualities of the great sages, whereas a person who is not so
transcendentally situated has no good qualifications, because he is
sure to be taking refuge in his own mental concoctions. Consequently,
it is rightly said herein that one has to give up all kinds of sense
desire manufactured by mental concoction. Artificially, such sense
desires cannot be stopped. But if one is engaged in Krsna
consciousness, then, automatically, sense desires subside without
extraneous efforts. Therefore, one has to engage himself in Krsna
consciousness without hesitation, for this devotional service will
instantly help one onto the platform of transcendental consciousness.
The highly developed soul always remains satisfied in himself by
realizing himself as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Lord. Such a
transcendentally situated person has no sense desires resulting from
petty materialism; rather, he remains always happy in his natural
position of eternally serving the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 56
duhkhesv anudvigna-manah
sukhesu vigata-sprhah
vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah
sthita-dhir munir ucyate
SYNONYMS
duhkhesu--in the threefold miseries; anudvigna-manah--without being
agitated in mind; sukhesu--in happiness; vigata-sprhah--without being
too interested; vita--free from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear;
krodhah--anger; sthita-dhih--one who is steady; munih--a sage; ucyate--
is called.
TRANSLATION
One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not
elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear
and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.
PURPORT
The word muni means one who can agitate his mind in various ways for
mental speculation without coming to a factual conclusion. It is said
that every muni has a different angle of vision, and unless a muni
differs from other munis, he cannot be called a muni in the strict
sense of the term. Nasav rsir yasya matam na bhinnam (Mahabharata,
Vana-parva 313.117). But a sthita-dhir muni, as mentioned herein by the
Lord, is different from an ordinary muni. The sthita-dhir muni is
always in Krsna consciousness, for he has exhausted all his business of
creative speculation. He has surpassed the stage of mental speculations
and has come to the conclusion that Lord Sri Krsna, or Vasudeva, is
everything (vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatma su-durlabhah). He is called
a muni fixed in mind. Such a fully Krsna conscious person is not at all
disturbed by the onslaughts of the threefold miseries, for he accepts
all miseries as the mercy of the Lord, thinking himself only worthy of
more trouble due to his past misdeeds; and he sees that his miseries,
by the grace of the Lord, are minimized to the lowest. Similarly, when
he is happy he gives credit to the Lord, thinking himself unworthy of
the happiness; he realizes that it is due only to the Lord's grace that
he is in such a comfortable condition and able to render better service
to the Lord. And, for the service of the Lord, he is always daring and
active and is not influenced by attachment or aversion. Attachment
means accepting things for one's own sense gratification, and
detachment is the absence of such sensual attachment. But one fixed in
Krsna consciousness has neither attachment nor detachment because his
life is dedicated in the service of the Lord. Consequently he is not at
all angry even when his attempts are unsuccessful. A Krsna conscious
person is always steady in his determination.
TEXT 57
yah sarvatranabhisnehas
tat tat prapya subhasubham
nabhinandati na dvesti
tasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; sarvatra--everywhere; anabhisnehah--without affection;
tat--that; tat--that; prapya--achieving; subha--good; asubham--evil;
na--never; abhinandati--praise; na--never; dvesti--envies; tasya--his;
prajna--perfect knowledge; pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATION
He who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he obtains
good, nor lament when he obtains evil, is firmly fixed in perfect
knowledge.
PURPORT
There is always some upheaval in the material world which may be good
or evil. One who is not agitated by such material upheavals, who is
unaffected by good and evil, is to be understood to be fixed in Krsna
consciousness. As long as one is in the material world there is always
the possibility of good and evil because this world is full of duality.
But one who is fixed in Krsna consciousness is not affected by good and
evil, because he is simply concerned with Krsna, who is all-good
absolute. Such consciousness in Krsna situates one in a perfect
transcendental position called, technically, samadhi.
TEXT 58
yada samharate cayam
kurmo 'nganiva sarvasah
indriyanindriyarthebhyas
tasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMS
yada--when; samharate--winds up; ca--also; ayam--all these; kurmah--
tortoise; angani--limbs; iva--like; sarvasah--altogether; indriyani--
senses; indriya-arthebhyah--from the sense objects; tasya--his; prajna-
-consciousness; pratisthita--fixed up.
TRANSLATION
One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the
tortoise draws its limbs within the shell, is to be understood as truly
situated in knowledge.
PURPORT
The test of a yogi, devotee, or self-realized soul is that he is able
to control the senses according to his plan. Most people, however, are
servants of the senses and are thus directed by the dictation of the
senses. That is the answer to the question as to how the yogi is
situated. The senses are compared to venomous serpents. They want to
act very loosely and without restriction. The yogi, or the devotee,
must be very strong to control the serpents--like a snake charmer. He
never allows them to act independently. There are many injunctions in
the revealed scriptures; some of them are do-not's, and some of them
are do's. Unless one is able to follow the do's and the do-not's,
restricting oneself from sense enjoyment, it is not possible to be
firmly fixed in Krsna consciousness. The best example, set herein, is
the tortoise. The tortoise can at any moment wind up his senses and
exhibit them again at any time for particular purposes. Similarly, the
senses of the Krsna conscious persons are used only for some particular
purpose in the service of the Lord and are withdrawn otherwise. Keeping
the senses always in the service of the Lord is the example set by the
analogy of the tortoise, who keeps the senses within.
TEXT 59
visaya vinivartante
niraharasya dehinah
rasa-varjam raso 'py asya
param drstva nivartate
SYNONYMS
visayah--objects for sense enjoyment; vinivartante--are practiced to be
refrained from; niraharasya--by negative restrictions; dehinah--for the
embodied; rasa-varjam--giving up the taste; rasah--sense of enjoyment;
api--although there is; asya--his; param--far superior things; drstva--
by experiencing; nivartate--ceases from.
TRANSLATION
The embodied soul may be restricted from sense enjoyment, though the
taste for sense objects remains. But, ceasing such engagements by
experiencing a higher taste, he is fixed in consciousness.
PURPORT
Unless one is transcendentally situated, it is not possible to cease
from sense enjoyment. The process of restriction from sense enjoyment
by rules and regulations is something like restricting a diseased
person from certain types of eatables. The patient, however, neither
likes such restrictions nor loses his taste for eatables. Similarly,
sense restriction by some spiritual process like astanga-yoga, in the
matter of yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana, dhyana,
etc., is recommended for less intelligent persons who have no better
knowledge. But one who has tasted the beauty of the Supreme Lord Krsna,
in the course of his advancement in Krsna consciousness, no longer has
a taste for dead material things. Therefore, restrictions are there for
the less intelligent neophytes in the spiritual advancement of life,
but such restrictions are only good if one actually has a taste for
Krsna consciousness. When one is actually Krsna conscious, he
automatically loses his taste for pale things.
TEXT 60
yatato hy api kaunteya
purusasya vipascitah
indriyani pramathini
haranti prasabham manah
SYNONYMS
yatatah--while endeavoring; hi--certainly; api--in spite of; kaunteya--
O son of Kunti; purusasya--of the man; vipascitah--full of
discriminating 
knowledge; 
indriyani--the 
senses; 
pramathini--
stimulated; haranti--throws forcefully; prasabham--by force; manah--the
mind.
TRANSLATION
The senses are so strong and impetuous, O Arjuna, that they forcibly
carry away the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoring
to control them.
PURPORT
There are many learned sages, philosophers and transcendentalists who
try to conquer the senses, but in spite of their endeavors, even the
greatest of them sometimes fall victim to material sense enjoyment due
to the agitated mind. Even Visvamitra, a great sage and perfect yogi,
was misled by Menaka into sex enjoyment, although the yogi was
endeavoring for sense control with severe types of penance and yoga
practice. And, of course, there are so many similar instances in the
history of the world. Therefore, it is very difficult to control the
mind and senses without being fully Krsna conscious. Without engaging
the mind in Krsna, one cannot cease such material engagements. A
practical example is given by Sri Yamunacarya, a great saint and
devotee, who says:
yad-avadhi mama cetah krsna-padaravinde
nava-nava-rasa-dhamany udyatam rantum asit
tad-avadhi bata nari-sangame smaryamane
bhavati mukha-vikarah susthu nisthivanam ca
"Since my mind has been engaged in the service of the lotus feet of
Lord Krsna, and I have been enjoying an ever new transcendental humor,
whenever I think of sex life with a woman, my face at once turns from
it, and I spit at the thought."
Krsna consciousness is such a transcendentally nice thing that
automatically material enjoyment becomes distasteful. It is as if a
hungry man had satisfied his hunger by a sufficient quantity of
nutritious eatables. Maharaja Ambarisa also conquered a great yogi,
Durvasa Muni, simply because his mind was engaged in Krsna
consciousness (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor vacamsi vaikuntha-
gunanuvarnane).
TEXT 61
tani sarvani samyamya
yukta asita mat-parah
vase hi yasyendriyani
tasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMS
tani--those senses; sarvani--all; samyamya--keeping under control;
yuktah--being engaged; asita--being so situated; mat-parah--in
relationship with Me; vase--in full subjugation; hi--certainly; yasya--
one whose; indriyani--senses; tasya--his; prajna--consciousness;
pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me, is
known as a man of steady intelligence.
PURPORT
That the highest conception of yoga perfection is Krsna consciousness
is clearly explained in this verse. And, unless one is Krsna conscious,
it is not at all possible to control the senses. As cited above, the
great sage Durvasa Muni picked a quarrel with Maharaja Ambarisa, and
Durvasa Muni unnecessarily became angry out of pride and therefore
could not check his senses. On the other hand, the king, although not
as powerful a yogi as the sage, but a devotee of the Lord, silently
tolerated all the sage's injustices and thereby emerged victorious. The
king was able to control his senses because of the following
qualifications, as mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (9.4.18-20):
sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayor
vacamsi vaikuntha-gunanuvarnane
karau harer mandira-marjanadisu
srutim cakaracyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-lingalaya-darsane drsau
tad-bhrtya-gatra-sparse 'nga-sangamam
ghranam ca tat-pada-saroja-saurabhe
srimat-tulasya rasanam tad-arpite
padau hareh ksetra-padanusarpane
siro hrsikesa-padabhivandane
kamam ca dasye na tu kama-kamyaya
yathottama-sloka-janasraya ratih
"King Ambarisa fixed his mind on the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, engaged
his words in describing the abode of the Lord, his hands in cleansing
the temple of the Lord, his ears in hearing the pastimes of the Lord,
his eyes in seeing the form of the Lord, his body in touching the body
of the devotee, his nostrils in smelling the flavor of the flowers
offered to the lotus feet of the Lord, his tongue in tasting the tulasi
leaves offered to Him, his legs in traveling to the holy place where
His temple is situated, his head in offering obeisances unto the Lord,
and his desires in fulfilling the desires of the Lord... and all these
qualifications made him fit to become a mat-para devotee of the Lord."
The word mat-para is most significant in this connection. How one can
become mat-para is described in the life of Maharaja Ambarisa. Srila
Baladeva Vidyabhusana, a great scholar and acarya in the line of the
mat-para, remarks: mad-bhakti-prabhavena sarvendriya-vijaya-purvika
svatma-drstih sulabheti bhavah. "The senses can be completely
controlled only by the strength of devotional service to Krsna." Also,
the example of fire is sometimes given: "As the small flames within
burn everything within the room, similarly Lord Visnu, situated in the
heart of the yogi, burns up all kinds of impurities." The Yoga-sutra
also prescribes meditation on Visnu, and not meditation on the void.
The so-called yogis who meditate on something which is not the Visnu
form simply waste their time in a vain search after some
phantasmagoria. We have to be Krsna conscious--devoted to the
Personality of Godhead. This is the aim of the real yoga.
TEXT 62
dhyayato visayan pumsah
sangas tesupajayate
sangat sanjayate kamah
kamat krodho 'bhijayate
SYNONYMS
dhyayatah--while contemplating; visayan--sense objects; pumsah--of the
person; sangah--attachment; tesu--in the sense objects; upajayate--
develops; sangat--attachment; sanjayate--develops; kamah--desire;
kamat--from desire; krodhah--anger; abhijayate--becomes manifest.
TRANSLATION
While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops
attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from
lust anger arises.
PURPORT
One who is not Krsna conscious is subjected to material desires while
contemplating the objects of the senses. The senses require real
engagements, and if they are not engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord, they will certainly seek engagement in the service
of materialism. In the material world everyone, including Lord Siva and
Lord Brahma--to say nothing of other demigods in the heavenly planets--
is subjected to the influence of sense objects, and the only method to
get out of this puzzle of material existence is to become Krsna
conscious. Lord Siva was deep in meditation, but when Parvati agitated
him for sense pleasure, he agreed to the proposal, and as a result
Kartikeya was born. When Haridasa Thakura was a young devotee of the
Lord, he was similarly allured by the incarnation of Maya-devi, but
Haridasa easily passed the test because of his unalloyed devotion to
Lord Krsna. As illustrated in the above-mentioned verse of Sri
Yamunacarya, a sincere devotee of the Lord shuns all material sense
enjoyment due to his higher taste for spiritual enjoyment in the
association of the Lord. That is the secret of success. One who is not,
therefore, in Krsna consciousness, however powerful he may be in
controlling the senses by artificial repression, is sure ultimately to
fail, for the slightest thought of sense pleasure will agitate him to
gratify his desires.
TEXT 63
krodhad bhavati sammohah
sammohat smrti-vibhramah
smrti-bhramsad buddhi-naso
buddhi-nasat pranasyati
SYNONYMS
krodhat--from anger; bhavati--takes place; sammohah--perfect illusion;
sammohat--from illusion; smrti--of memory; vibhramah--bewilderment;
smrti-bhramsat--after bewilderment of memory; buddhi-nasah--loss of
intelligence; buddhi-nasat--and from loss of intelligence; pranasyati--
falls down.
TRANSLATION
From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory.
When the memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when
intelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material pool.
PURPORT
By development of Krsna consciousness one can know that everything has
its use in the service of the Lord. Those who are without knowledge of
Krsna consciousness artificially try to avoid material objects, and as
a result, although they desire liberation from material bondage, they
do not attain to the perfect stage of renunciation. On the other hand,
a person in Krsna consciousness knows how to use everything in the
service of the Lord; therefore he does not become a victim of material
consciousness. For example, for an impersonalist, the Lord, or the
Absolute, being impersonal, cannot eat. Whereas an impersonalist tries
to avoid good eatables, a devotee knows that Krsna is the supreme
enjoyer and that He eats all that is offered to Him in devotion. So,
after offering good eatables to the Lord, the devotee takes the
remnants, called prasadam. Thus everything becomes spiritualized and
there is no danger of a downfall. The devotee takes prasadam in Krsna
consciousness, whereas the nondevotee rejects it as material. The
impersonalist, therefore, cannot enjoy life due to his artificial
renunciation; and for this reason, a slight agitation of the mind pulls
him down again into the pool of material existence. It is said that
such a soul, even though rising up to the point of liberation, falls
down again due to his not having support in devotional service.
TEXT 64
raga-dvesa-vimuktais tu
visayan indriyais caran
atma-vasyair vidheyatma
prasadam adhigacchati
SYNONYMS
raga--attachment; dvesa--detachment; vimuktaih--by one who has been
free from such things; tu--but; visayan--sense objects; indriyaih--by
the senses; caran--acting; atma-vasyaih--one who has control over;
vidheya-atma--one who follows regulated freedom; prasadam--the mercy of
the Lord; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATION
One who can control his senses by practicing the regulative principles
of freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and thus become
free from all attachment and aversion.
PURPORT
It is already explained that one may externally control the senses by
some artificial process, but unless the senses are engaged in the
transcendental service of the Lord, there is every chance of a fall.
Although the person in full Krsna consciousness may apparently be on
the sensual plane, because of his being Krsna conscious, he has no
attachment to sensual activities. The Krsna conscious person is
concerned only with the satisfaction of Krsna, and nothing else.
Therefore he is transcendental to all attachment. If Krsna wants, the
devotee can do anything which is ordinarily undesirable; and if Krsna
does not want, he shall not do that which he would have ordinarily done
for his own satisfaction. Therefore to act or not to act is within his
control because he acts only under the direction of Krsna. This
consciousness is the causeless mercy of the Lord, which the devotee can
achieve in spite of his being attached to the sensual platform.
TEXT 65
prasade sarva-duhkhanam
hanir asyopajayate
prasanna-cetaso hy asu
buddhih paryavatisthate
SYNONYMS
prasade--on achievement of the causeless mercy of the Lord; sarva--of
all; duhkhanam--material miseries; hanih--destruction; asya--his;
upajayate--takes place; prasanna-cetasah--of the happy-minded; hi--
certainly; asu--very soon; buddhih--intelligence; pari--sufficiently;
avatisthate--established.
TRANSLATION
For one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the threefold
miseries of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy state,
one's intelligence soon becomes steady.
TEXT 66
nasti buddhir ayuktasya
na cayuktasya bhavana
na cabhavayatah santir
asantasya kutah sukham
SYNONYMS
na asti--there cannot be; buddhih--transcendental intelligence;
ayuktasya--of one who is not connected (with Krsna consciousness); na--
neither; ca--and; ayuktasya--of one devoid of Krsna consciousness;
bhavana--mind fixed in happiness; na--neither; ca--and; abhavayatah--
one who is not fixed; santih--peace; asantasya--of the unpeaceful;
kutah--where is; sukham--happiness.
TRANSLATION
One who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a
controlled mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is no
possibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace?
PURPORT
Unless one is in Krsna consciousness there is no possibility of peace.
So it is confirmed in the Fifth Chapter (5.29) that when one
understands that Krsna is the only enjoyer of all the good results of
sacrifice and penance, and that He is the proprietor of all universal
manifestations, that He is the real friend of all living entities, then
only can one have real peace. Therefore, if one is not in Krsna
consciousness, there cannot be a final goal for the mind. Disturbance
is due to want of an ultimate goal, and when one is certain that Krsna
is the enjoyer, proprietor and friend of everyone and everything, then
one can, with a steady mind, bring about peace. Therefore, one who is
engaged without a relationship with Krsna is certainly always in
distress and is without peace, however much he may make a show of peace
and spiritual advancement in life. Krsna consciousness is a self-
manifested peaceful condition which can be achieved only in
relationship with Krsna.
TEXT 67
indriyanam hi caratam
yan mano 'nuvidhiyate
tad asya harati prajnam
vayur navam ivambhasi
SYNONYMS
indriyanam--of the senses; hi--certainly; caratam--while herding over;
yat--that; manah--mind; anuvidhiyate--becomes constantly engaged; tat--
that; asya--his; harati--takes away; prajnam--intelligence; vayuh--
wind; navam--a boat; iva--like; ambhasi--on the water.
TRANSLATION
As a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one of the
senses on which the mind focuses can carry away a man's intelligence.
PURPORT
Unless all of the senses are engaged in the service of the Lord, even
one of them engaged in sense gratification can deviate the devotee from
the path of transcendental advancement. As mentioned in the life of
Maharaja Ambarisa, all of the senses must be engaged in Krsna
consciousness, for that is the correct technique for controlling the
mind.
TEXT 68
tasmad yasya maha-baho
nigrhitani sarvasah
indriyanindriyarthebhyas
tasya prajna pratisthita
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; yasya--of one's; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one;
nigrhitani--so curbed down; sarvasah--all around; indriyani--the
senses; indriya-arthebhyah--for the sake of sense objects; tasya--his;
prajna--intelligence; pratisthita--fixed.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from their
objects is certainly of steady intelligence.
PURPORT
As enemies are curbed by superior force, similarly the senses, can be
curbed not by any human endeavor, but only by keeping them engaged in
the service of the Lord. One who has understood this--that only by
Krsna consciousness is one really established in intelligence and that
one should practice this art under the guidance of a bona fide
spiritual master--is called sadhaka, or a suitable candidate for
liberation.
TEXT 69
ya nisa sarva-bhutanam
tasyam jagarti samyami
yasyam jagrati bhutani
sa nisa pasyato muneh
SYNONYMS
ya--what; nisa--is night; sarva--all; bhutanam--of living entities;
tasyam--in that; jagarti--wakeful; samyami--the self-controlled;
yasyam--in which; jagrati--awake; bhutani--all beings; sa--that is;
nisa--night; pasyatah--for the introspective; muneh--sage.
TRANSLATION
What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-
controlled; and the time of awakening for all beings is night for the
introspective sage.
PURPORT
There are two classes of intelligent men. The one is intelligent in
material activities for sense gratification, and the other is
introspective and awake to the cultivation of self-realization.
Activities of the introspective sage, or thoughtful man, are night for
persons materially absorbed. Materialistic persons remain asleep in
such a night due to their ignorance of self-realization. The
introspective sage remains alert in the "night" of the materialistic
men. The sage feels transcendental pleasure in the gradual advancement
of spiritual culture, whereas the man in materialistic activities,
being asleep to self-realization, dreams of varieties of sense
pleasure, feeling sometimes happy and sometimes distressed in his
sleeping condition. The introspective man is always indifferent to
materialistic happiness and distress. He goes on with his self-
realization activities undisturbed by material reactions.
TEXT 70
apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvat
tadvat kama yam pravisanti sarve
sa santim apnoti na kama-kami
SYNONYMS
apuryamanam--always filled; acala-pratistham--steadily situated;
samudram--the ocean; apah--water; pravisanti--enter; yadvat--as;
tadvat--so; kamah--desires; yam--unto one; pravisanti--enter; sarve--
all; sah--that person; santim--peace; apnoti--achieves; na--not; kama-
kami--one who desires to fulfill desires.
TRANSLATION
A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is
always still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to
satisfy such desires.
PURPORT
Although the vast ocean is always filled with water, it is always,
especially during the rainy season, being filled with much more water.
But the ocean remains the same--steady; it is not agitated, nor does it
cross beyond the limit of its brink. That is also true of a person
fixed in Krsna consciousness. As long as one has the material body, the
demands of the body for sense gratification will continue. The devotee,
however, is not in need of anything because the Lord fulfills all his
material necessities. Therefore he is like the ocean--always full in
himself. Desires may come to him like the waters of the rivers that
flow into the ocean, but he is steady in his activities, and he is not
even slightly disturbed by desires for sense gratification. That is the
proof of a Krsna conscious man--one who has lost all inclinations for
material sense gratification, although the desires are present. Because
he remains satisfied in the transcendental loving service of the Lord,
he can remain steady, like the ocean, and therefore enjoy full peace.
Others, however, who fulfill desires even up to the limit of
liberation, what to speak of material success, never attain peace. The
fruitive workers, the salvationists, and also the yogis who are after
mystic powers, are all unhappy because of unfulfilled desires. But the
person in Krsna consciousness is happy in the service of the Lord, and
he has no desires to be fulfilled. In fact, he does not even desire
liberation from the so-called material bondage. The devotees of Krsna
have no material desires, and therefore they are in perfect peace.
TEXT 71
vihaya kaman yah sarvan
pumams carati nihsprhah
nirmamo nirahankarah
sa santim adhigacchati
SYNONYMS
vihaya--after giving up; kaman--all material desires for sense
gratification; yah--the person; sarvan--all; puman--a person; carati--
lives; 
nihsprhah--desireless; 
nirmamah--without 
a 
sense 
of
proprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sah--all; santim--
perfect peace; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATION
A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who
lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship
and is devoid of false ego--he alone can attain real peace.
PURPORT
To become desireless means not to desire anything for sense
gratification. In other words, desire for becoming Krsna conscious is
actually desirelessness. To understand one's actual position as the
eternal servitor of Krsna, without falsely claiming this material body
to be oneself and without falsely claiming proprietorship over anything
in the world, is the perfect stage of Krsna consciousness. One who is
situated in this perfect stage knows that because Krsna is the
proprietor of everything, therefore everything must be used for the
satisfaction of Krsna. Arjuna did not want to fight for his own sense
satisfaction, but when he became fully Krsna conscious he fought
because Krsna wanted him to fight. For himself there was no desire to
fight, but for Krsna the same Arjuna fought to his best ability. Desire
for the satisfaction of Krsna is really desirelessness; it is not an
artificial attempt to abolish desires. The living entity cannot be
desireless or senseless, but he does have to change the quality of the
desires. A materially desireless person certainly knows that everything
belongs to Krsna (isavasyam idam sarvam), and therefore he does not
falsely claim proprietorship over anything. This transcendental
knowledge is based on self-realization--namely, knowing perfectly well
that every living entity is the eternal part and parcel of Krsna in
spiritual identity, and therefore the eternal position of the living
entity is never on the level of Krsna or greater than Him. This
understanding of Krsna consciousness is the basic principle of real
peace.
TEXT 72
esa brahmi sthitih partha
nainam prapya vimuhyati
sthitvasyam anta-kale 'pi
brahma-nirvanam rcchati
SYNONYMS
esa--this; brahmi--spiritual; sthitih--situation; partha--O son of
Prtha; na--never; enam--this; prapya--achieving; vimuhyati--bewilders;
sthitva--being so situated; asyam--being so; anta-kale--at the end of
life; api--also; brahma-nirvanam--spiritual (kingdom of God); rcchati--
attains.
TRANSLATION
That is the way of the spiritual and godly life, after attaining which
a man is not bewildered. Being so situated even at the hour of death,
one can enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
One can attain Krsna consciousness or divine life at once, within a
second--or one may not attain such a state of life even after millions
of births. It is only a matter of understanding and accepting the fact.
Khatvanga Maharaja attained this state of life just a few minutes
before his death, by surrendering unto Krsna. Nirvana means ending the
process of materialistic life. According to Buddhist philosophy, there
is only void after the completion of this material life, but Bhagavad-
gita teaches differently. Actual life begins after the completion of
this material life. For the gross materialist it is sufficient to know
that one has to end this materialistic way of life, but for persons who
are spiritually advanced, there is another life after this
materialistic life. Before ending this life, if one fortunately becomes
Krsna conscious, he at once attains the stage of brahma-nirvana. There
is no difference between the kingdom of God and the devotional service
of the Lord. Since both of them are on the absolute plane, to be
engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord is to have
attained the spiritual kingdom. In the material world there are
activities of sense gratification, whereas in the spiritual world there
are activities of Krsna consciousness. Attainment of Krsna
consciousness even during this life is immediate attainment of Brahman,
and one who is situated in Krsna consciousness has certainly already
entered into the kingdom of God.
Brahman is just the opposite of matter. Therefore brahmi sthiti means
"not on the platform of material activities." Devotional service of the
Lord is accepted in the Bhagavad-gita as the liberated stage (sa gunan
samatityaitan brahma-bhuyaya kalpate). Therefore, brahmi sthiti is
liberation from material bondage.
Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has summarized this Second Chapter of the
Bhagavad-gita as being the contents for the whole text. In the
Bhagavad-gita, the subject matters are karma-yoga, jnana-yoga, and
bhakti-yoga. In the Second Chapter karma-yoga and jnana-yoga have been
clearly discussed, and a glimpse of bhakti-yoga has also been given, as
the contents for the complete text.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Second Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Contents.