Chapter 15
The Yoga of the Supreme Person
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
urdhva-mulam adhah-sakham
asvattham prahur avyayam
chandamsi yasya parnani
yas tam veda sa veda-vit
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; urdhva-
mulam--with roots above; adhah--downwards; sakham--branches; asvattham-
-banyan tree; prahuh--said; avyayam--eternal; chandamsi--Vedic hymns;
yasya--of which; parnani--the leaves; yah--anyone; tam--that; veda--
knows; sah--he; veda-vit--the knower of the Vedas.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: There is a banyan tree which has its roots
upward and its branches down and whose leaves are the Vedic hymns. One
who knows this tree is the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORT
After the discussion of the importance of bhakti-yoga, one may
question, "What about the Vedas?" It is explained in this chapter that
the purpose of Vedic study is to understand Krsna. Therefore one who is
in Krsna consciousness, who is engaged in devotional service, already
knows the Vedas.
The entanglement of this material world is compared here to a banyan
tree. For one who is engaged in fruitive activities, there is no end to
the banyan tree. He wanders from one branch to another, to another, to
another. The tree of this material world has no end, and for one who is
attached to this tree, there is no possibility of liberation. The Vedic
hymns, meant for elevating oneself, are called the leaves of this tree.
This tree's roots grow upward because they begin from where Brahma is
located, the topmost planet of this universe. If one can understand
this indestructible tree of illusion, then one can get out of it.
This process of extrication should be understood. In the previous
chapters it has been explained that there are many processes by which
to get out of the material entanglement. And, up to the Thirteenth
Chapter, we have seen that devotional service to the Supreme Lord is
the best way. Now, the basic principle of devotional service is
detachment 
from 
material 
activities 
and 
attachment 
to 
the
transcendental service of the Lord. The process of breaking attachment
to the material world is discussed in the beginning of this chapter.
The root of this material existence grows upward. This means that it
begins from the total material substance, from the topmost planet of
the universe. From there, the whole universe is expanded, with so many
branches, representing the various planetary systems. The fruits
represent the results of the living entities' activities, namely,
religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation.
Now, there is no ready experience in this world of a tree situated with
its branches down and its roots upward, but there is such a thing. That
tree can be found beside a reservoir of water. We can see that the
trees on the bank reflect upon the water with their branches down and
roots up. In other words, the tree of this material world is only a
reflection of the real tree of the spiritual world. This reflection of
the spiritual world is situated on desire, just as a tree's reflection
is situated on water. Desire is the cause of things being situated in
this reflected material light. One who wants to get out of this
material existence must know this tree thoroughly through analytical
study. Then he can cut off his relationship with it.
This tree, being the reflection of the real tree, is an exact replica.
Everything is there in the spiritual world. The impersonalists take
Brahma to be the root of this material tree, and from the root,
according to Sankhya philosophy, come prakrti, purusa, then the three
gunas, then the five gross elements (panca-maha-bhuta), then the ten
senses (dasendriya), mind, etc. In this way they divide up the whole
material world into twenty-four elements. If Brahma is the center of
all manifestations, then this material world is a manifestation of the
center by 180 degrees, and the other 180 degrees constitute the
spiritual world. The material world is the perverted reflection, so the
spiritual world must have the same variegatedness, but in reality. The
prakrti is the external energy of the Supreme Lord, and the purusa is
the Supreme Lord Himself, and that is explained in Bhagavad-gita. Since
this manifestation is material, it is temporary. A reflection is
temporary, for it is sometimes seen and sometimes not seen. But the
origin from whence the reflection is reflected is eternal. The material
reflection of the real tree has to be cut off. When it is said that a
person knows the Vedas, it is assumed that he knows how to cut off
attachment to this material world. If one knows that process, he
actually knows the Vedas. One who is attracted by the ritualistic
formulas of the Vedas is attracted by the beautiful green leaves of the
tree. He does not exactly know the purpose of the Vedas. The purpose of
the Vedas, as disclosed by the Personality of Godhead Himself, is to
cut down this reflected tree and attain the real tree of the spiritual
world.
TEXT 2
adhas cordhvam prasrtas tasya sakha
guna-pravrddha visaya-pravalah
adhas ca mulany anusantatani
karmanubandhini manusya-loke
SYNONYMS
adhah--downward; ca--and; urdhvam--upward; prasrtah--extended; tasya--
its; sakhah--branches; guna--modes of material nature; pravrddhah--
developed; visaya--sense objects; pravalah--twigs; adhah--downward; ca-
-and; mulani--roots; anusantatani--extended; karma--according to work;
anubandhini--bound; manusya-loke--in the world of human society.
TRANSLATION
The branches of this tree extend downward and upward, nourished by the
three modes of material nature. The twigs are the objects of the
senses. This tree also has roots going down, and these are bound to the
fruitive actions of human society.
PURPORT
The description of the banyan tree is further explained here. Its
branches spread in all directions. In the lower parts, there are
variegated manifestations of living entities such as human beings,
animals, horses, cows, dogs, cats, etc. These are situated on the lower
parts of the branches, whereas on the upper parts are higher forms of
living entities: the demigods, Gandharvas and many other higher species
of life. As a tree is nourished by water, so this tree is nourished by
the three modes of material nature. Sometimes we find that a tract of
land is barren for want of sufficient water, and sometimes a tract is
very green; similarly, where the modes of material nature are
proportionately greater in quantity, the different species of life are
manifest in that proportion accordingly.
The twigs of the tree are considered to be the sense objects. By
development of the different modes of nature, we develop different
senses, and, by the senses, we enjoy different varieties of sense
objects. The source of the senses--the ears, the nose, eyes, etc.--is
considered to be the upper twigs, tuned to the enjoyment of different
sense objects. The leaves are sound, form, touch--the sense objects.
The roots, which are subsidiary, are the by-products of different
varieties of suffering and sense enjoyment. Thus we develop attachment
and aversion. The tendencies toward piety and impiety are considered to
be the secondary roots, spreading in all directions. The real root is
from Brahmaloka, and the other roots are in the human planetary
systems. After one enjoys the results of virtuous activities in the
upper planetary systems, he comes down to this earth and renews his
karma, or fruitive activities for promotion. This planet of human
beings is considered the field of activities.
TEXTS 3-4
na rupam asyeha tathopalabhyate
nanto na cadir na ca sampratistha
asvattham enam su-virudha-mulam
asanga-sastrena drdhena chittva
tatah padam tat parimargitavyam
yasmin gata na nivartanti bhuyah
tam eva cadyam purusam prapadye
yatah pravrttih prasrta purani
SYNONYMS
na--not; rupam--form; asya--of this tree; iha--in this; tatha--also;
upalabhyate--can be perceived; na--never; antah--end; na--never; ca--
also; 
adih--beginning; 
na--never; 
ca--also; 
sampratistha--the
foundation; asvattham--banyan tree; enam--this; su-virudha--strongly;
mulam--rooted; asanga-sastrena--by the weapon of detachment; drdhena--
strong; chittva--by cutting; tatah--thereafter; padam--situation; tat--
that; parimargitavyam--has to be searched out; yasmin--where; gatah--
going; na--never; nivartanti--comes back; bhuyah--again; tam--to Him;
eva--certainly; ca--also; adyam--original; purusam--the Personality of
Godhead; prapadye--surrender; yatah--from whom; pravrttih--beginning;
prasrta--extended; purani--very old.
TRANSLATION
The real form of this tree cannot be perceived in this world. No one
can understand where it ends, where it begins, or where its foundation
is. But with determination one must cut down this tree with the weapon
of detachment. So doing, one must seek that place from which, having
once gone, one never returns, and there surrender to that Supreme
Personality of Godhead from whom everything has began and in whom
everything is abiding since time immemorial.
PURPORT
It is now clearly stated that the real form of this banyan tree cannot
be understood in this material world. Since the root is upwards, the
extension of the real tree is at the other end. No one can see how far
the tree extends, nor can one see the beginning of this tree. Yet one
has to find out the cause. "I am the son of my father, my father is the
son of such and such a person, etc." By searching in this way, one
comes to Brahma, who is generated by the Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Finally,
in this way, when one reaches the Supreme Personality of Godhead, that
is the end of research work. One has to search out the origin of this
tree, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the association of
persons who are in knowledge of that Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Then by understanding one becomes gradually detached from this false
reflection of reality, and by knowledge one can cut off the connection
and actually become situated in the real tree.
The word asanga is very important in this connection because the
attachment for sense enjoyment and lording it over material nature is
very strong. Therefore one must learn detachment by discussion of
spiritual science based on authoritative scriptures, and one must hear
from persons who are actually in knowledge. As a result of such
discussion in the association of devotees, one comes to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Then the first thing one must do is surrender
to Him. The description of that place whence going no one returns to
this false reflected tree is given here. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, is the original root from whom everything has emanated.
To gain favor of that Personality of Godhead, one has only to
surrender, and this is a result of performing devotional service by
hearing, chanting, etc. He is the cause of this extension of the
material world. This has already been explained by the Lord Himself:
aham sarvasya prabhavah, "I am the origin of everything." Therefore to
get out of the entanglement of this strong banyan tree of material
life, one must surrender to Krsna. As soon as one surrenders unto
Krsna, he becomes detached automatically from this material extension.
TEXT 5
nirmana-moha jita-sanga-dosa
adhyatma-nitya vinivrtta-kamah
dvandvair vimuktah sukha-duhkha-samjnair
gacchanty amudhah padam avyayam tat
SYNONYMS
nih--without; mana--respect; mohah--illusion; jita--having conquered;
sanga--association; dosah--faulty; adhyatma--spiritual; nityah--
eternity; vinivrtta--associated; kamah--lust; dvandvaih--with duality;
vimuktah--liberated; sukha-duhkha--happiness and distress; samjnaih--
named; gacchanti--attains; amudhah--unbewildered; padam--situation;
avyayam--eternal; tat--that.
TRANSLATION
One who is free from illusion, false prestige, and false association,
who understands the eternal, who is done with material lust and is
freed from the duality of happiness and distress, and who knows how to
surrender unto the Supreme Person, attains to that eternal kingdom.
PURPORT
The surrendering process is described here very nicely. The first
qualification is that one should not be deluded by pride. Because the
conditioned soul is puffed up, thinking himself the lord of material
nature, it is very difficult for him to surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. One should know by the cultivation of real
knowledge that he is not lord of material nature; the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the Lord. When one is free from delusion
caused by pride, he can begin the process of surrender. For one who is
always expecting some honor in this material world, it is not possible
to surrender to the Supreme Person. Pride is due to illusion, for
although one comes here, stays for a brief time and then goes away, he
has the foolish notion that he is the lord of the world. He thus makes
all things complicated, and he is always in trouble. The whole world
moves under this impression. People are considering that the land, this
earth, belongs to human society, and they have divided the land under
the false impression that they are the proprietors. One has to get out
of this false notion that human society is the proprietor of this
world. When one is freed from such a false notion, he becomes free from
all the false associations caused by familial, social and national
affections. These faulty associations bind one to this material world.
After this stage, one has to develop spiritual knowledge. One has to
cultivate knowledge of what is actually his own and what is actually
not his own. And, when one has an understanding of things as they are,
he becomes free from all dual conceptions such as happiness and
distress, pleasure and pain. He becomes full in knowledge; then it is
possible for him to surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 6
na tad bhasayate suryo
na sasanko na pavakah
yad gatva na nivartante
tad dhama paramam mama
SYNONYMS
na--not; tat--that; bhasayate--illuminates; suryah--the sun; na--nor;
sasankah--the moon; na--nor; pavakah--fire, electricity; yat--where;
gatva--going; na--never; nivartante--comes back; tat dhama--that abode;
paramam--supreme; mama--My.
TRANSLATION
That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world.
PURPORT
The spiritual world, the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krsna--which is known as Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana--is described
here. In the spiritual sky there is no need of sunshine, moonshine,
fire or electricity, because all the planets are self-luminous. We have
only one planet in this universe, the sun, which is self-luminous, but
all the planets in the spiritual sky are self-luminous. The shining
effulgence of all those planets (called Vaikunthas) constitutes the
shining sky known as the brahmajyoti. Actually, the effulgence is
emanating from the planet of Krsna, Goloka Vrndavana. Part of that
shining effulgence is covered by the mahat-tattva, the material world.
Other than this, the major portion of that shining sky is full of
spiritual planets, which are called Vaikunthas, chief of which is
Goloka Vrndavana.
As long as a living entity is in this dark material world, he is in
conditional life, but as soon as he reaches the spiritual sky by
cutting through the false, perverted tree of this material world, he
becomes liberated. Then there is no chance of his coming back here. In
his conditional life, the living entity considers himself to be the
lord of this material world, but in his liberated state he enters into
the spiritual kingdom and becomes an associate of the Supreme Lord.
There he enjoys eternal bliss, eternal life, and full knowledge.
One should be captivated by this information. He should desire to
transfer himself to that eternal world and extricate himself from this
false reflection of reality. For one who is too much attached to this
material world, it is very difficult to cut that attachment, but if he
takes to Krsna consciousness, there is a chance of gradually becoming
detached. One has to associate himself with devotees, those who are in
Krsna consciousness. One should search out a society dedicated to Krsna
consciousness and learn how to discharge devotional service. In this
way he can cut off his attachment to the material world. One cannot
become detached from the attraction of the material world simply by
dressing himself in saffron cloth. He must become attached to the
devotional service of the Lord. Therefore one should take it very
seriously that devotional service as described in the Twelfth Chapter
is the only way to get out of this false representation of the real
tree. In Chapter Fourteen the contamination of all kinds of processes
by material nature is described. Only devotional service is described
as purely transcendental.
The words paramam mama are very important here. Actually every nook and
corner is the property of the Supreme Lord, but the spiritual world is
paramam, full of six opulences. The Katha Upanisad (2.2.15) also
confirms that in the spiritual world there is no need of sunshine or
moonshine (na tatra suryo bhati na candratarakam), for the whole
spiritual sky is illuminated by the internal potency of the Supreme
Lord. That supreme abode can be achieved only by surrender and by no
other means.
TEXT 7
mamaivamso jiva-loke
jiva-bhutah sanatanah
manah-sasthanindriyani
prakrti-sthani karsati
SYNONYMS
mama--My; eva--certainly; amsah--fragmental particles; jiva-loke--world
of conditional life; jiva-bhutah--the conditioned living entity;
sanatanah--eternal; manah--mind; sasthani--six; indriyani--senses;
prakrti--material nature; sthani--situated; karsati--struggling hard.
TRANSLATION
The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal fragmental
parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the
six senses, which include the mind.
PURPORT
In this verse the identity of the living being is clearly given. The
living entity is the fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord--
eternally. It is not that he assumes individuality in his conditional
life and in his liberated state becomes one with the Supreme Lord. He
is eternally fragmented. It is clearly said, sanatanah. According to
the Vedic version, the Supreme Lord manifests and expands Himself in
innumerable expansions, of which the primary expansions are called
visnu-tattva and the secondary expansions are called the living
entities. In other words, the visnu-tattva is the personal expansion,
and the living entities are separated expansions. By His personal
expansion, He is manifested in various forms like Lord Rama,
Nrsimhadeva, Visnumurti and all the predominating Deities in the
Vaikuntha planets. The separated expansions, the living entities, are
eternally servitors. The personal expansions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the individual identities of the Godhead, are always
present. Similarly, the separated expansions of the living entities
have their identities. As fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord, the living entities also have fragmental portions of His
qualities, of which independence is one. Every living entity, as an
individual soul, has his personal individuality and a minute form of
independence. By misuse of that independence one becomes a conditioned
soul, and by proper use of independence he is always liberated. In
either case, he is qualitatively eternal, as the Supreme Lord is. In
his liberated state he is freed from this material condition, and he is
under the engagement of transcendental service unto the Lord; in his
conditioned life he is dominated by the material modes of nature, and
he forgets the transcendental loving service of the Lord. As a result,
he has to struggle very hard to maintain his existence in the material
world.
The living entities, not only the human beings and the cats and dogs,
but even the greater controllers of the material world--Brahma, Lord
Siva and even Visnu--are all parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord.
They are all eternal, not temporary manifestations. The word karsati
(struggling or grappling hard) is very significant. The conditioned
soul is bound up, as though shackled by iron chains. He is bound up by
the false ego, and the mind is the chief agent which is driving him in
this material existence. When the mind is in the mode of goodness, his
activities are good; when the mind is in the mode of passion, his
activities are troublesome; and when the mind is in the mode of
ignorance, he travels in the lower species of life. It is clear,
however, in this verse, that the conditioned soul is covered by the
material body, with the mind and the senses, and when he is liberated
this material covering perishes, but his spiritual body manifests its
individual capacity. The following information is there in the
Madhyandinayana-sruti: sa va esa brahma-nistha idam sariram martyam
atisrjya 
brahmabhisampadya 
brahmana 
pasyati 
brahmana 
srnoti
brahmanaivedam sarvam anubhavati. It is stated here that when a living
entity gives up this material embodiment and enters into the spiritual
world, he revives his spiritual body, and in his spiritual body he can
see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. He can hear and
speak to Him face to face, and he can understand the Supreme
Personality as He is. In smrti also it is understood, vasanti yatra
purusah sarve vaikuntha-murtayah: in the spiritual planets everyone
lives in bodies featured like the Supreme Personality of Godhead's. As
far as bodily construction is concerned, there is no difference between
the part and parcel living entities and the expansions of visnu-murti.
In other words, at liberation the living entity gets a spiritual body
by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The word mamaivamsah (fragmental parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord)
is also very significant. The fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is
not like some material broken part. We have already understood in the
Second Chapter that the spirit cannot be cut into pieces. This fragment
is not materially conceived. It is not like matter, which can be cut
into pieces and joined together again. That conception is not
applicable here, because the Sanskrit word sanatana (eternal) is used.
The fragmental portion is eternal. It is also stated in the beginning
of the Second Chapter that (dehino 'smin yatha dehe) in each and every
individual body the fragmental portion of the Supreme Lord is present.
That fragmental portion, when liberated from the bodily entanglement,
revives its original spiritual body in the spiritual sky in a spiritual
planet and enjoys association with the Supreme Lord. It is, however,
understood here that the living entity, being the fragmental part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, is qualitatively one with the Lord, just as
the parts and parcels of gold are also gold.
TEXT 8
sariram yad avapnoti
yac capy utkramatisvarah
grhitvaitani samyati
vayur gandhan ivasayat
SYNONYMS
sariram--body; yat--as much as; avapnoti--gets; yat--that which; ca--
also; api--virtually; utkramati--gives up; isvarah--the lord of the
body; grhitva--taking; etani--all these; samyati--goes away; vayuh--
air; gandhan--smell; iva--like; asayat--from the flower.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in the material world carries his different
conceptions of life from one body to another as the air carries aromas.
PURPORT
Here the living entity is described as isvara, the controller of his
own body. If he likes, he can change his body to a higher grade, and if
he likes he can move to a lower class. Minute independence is there.
The change his body undergoes depends upon him. At the time of death,
the consciousness he has created will carry him on to the next type of
body. If he has made his consciousness like that of a cat or dog, he is
sure to change to a cat's or dog's body. And, if he has fixed his
consciousness on godly qualities, he will change into the form of a
demigod. And, if he is in Krsna consciousness, he will be transferred
to Krsnaloka in the spiritual world and will associate with Krsna. It
is a false claim that after the annihilation of this body everything is
finished. The individual soul is transmigrating from one body to
another, and his present body and present activities are the background
of his next body. One gets a different body according to karma, and he
has to quit this body in due course. It is stated here that the subtle
body, which carries the conception of the next body, develops another
body in the next life. This process of transmigrating from one body to
another and struggling while in the body is called karsati or struggle
for existence.
TEXT 9
srotram caksuh sparsanam ca
rasanam ghranam eva ca
adhisthaya manas cayam
visayan upasevate
SYNONYMS
srotram--ears; caksuh--eyes; sparsanam--touch; ca--also; rasanam--
tongue; ghranam--smelling power; eva--also; ca--and; adhisthaya--being
situated; manah--mind; ca--also; ayam--this; visayan--sense objects;
upasevate--enjoys.
TRANSLATION
The living entity, thus taking another gross body, obtains a certain
type of ear, tongue, eye, nose and sense of touch, which are grouped
about the mind. He thus enjoys a particular set of sense objects.
PURPORT
In other words, if the living entity adulterates his consciousness with
the qualities of cats and dogs, in his next life he gets a cat or dog
body and enjoys. Consciousness is originally pure, like water. But if
we mix water with a certain color, it changes. Similarly, consciousness
is pure, for the spirit soul is pure. But consciousness is changed
according to the association of the material qualities. Real
consciousness is Krsna consciousness. When, therefore, one is situated
in Krsna consciousness, he is in his pure life. But if his
consciousness is adulterated by some type of material mentality, in the
next life he gets a corresponding body. He does not necessarily get a
human body again; he can get the body of a cat, dog, hog, demigod or
one of many other forms, for there are 8,400,000 species.
TEXT 10
utkramantam sthitam vapi
bhunjanam va gunanvitam
vimudha nanupasyanti
pasyanti jnana-caksusah
SYNONYMS
utkramantam--quitting the body; sthitam--situated in the body; va api--
either; bhunjanam--enjoying; va--or; guna-anvitam--under the spell of
the modes of material nature; vimudhah--foolish persons; na--never;
anupasyanti--can see; pasyanti--one can see; jnana-caksusah--one who
has the eyes of knowledge.
TRANSLATION
The foolish cannot understand how a living entity can quit his body,
nor can they understand what sort of body he enjoys under the spell of
the modes of nature. But one whose eyes are trained in knowledge can
see all this.
PURPORT
The word jnana-caksusah is very significant. Without knowledge, one
cannot understand how a living entity leaves his present body, nor what
form of body he is going to take in the next life, nor even why he is
living in a particular type of body. This requires a great amount of
knowledge understood from Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures heard
from a bona fide spiritual master. One who is trained to perceive all
these things is fortunate. Every living entity is quitting his body
under certain circumstances; he is living under certain circumstances,
and he is enjoying under certain circumstances under the spell of
material nature. As a result, he is suffering different kinds of
happiness and distress, under the illusion of sense enjoyment. Persons
who are everlastingly fooled by lust and desire lose all power of
understand their change of body and their stay in a particular body.
They cannot comprehend it. Those who have developed spiritual
knowledge, however, can see that the spirit is different from the body
and is changing its body and enjoying in different ways. A person in
such knowledge can understand how the conditioned living entity is
suffering in this material existence. Therefore those who are highly
developed in Krsna consciousness try their best to give this knowledge
to the people in general, for their conditional life is very much
troublesome. They should come out of it and be Krsna conscious and
liberate themselves to transfer to the spiritual world.
TEXT 11
yatanto yoginas cainam
pasyanty atmany avasthitam
yatanto 'py akrtatmano
nainam pasyanty acetasah
SYNONYMS
yatantah--endeavoring; yoginah--transcendentalists; ca--also; enam--
this; pasyanti--can see; atmani--in the self; avasthitam--situated;
yatantah--although endeavoring; api--although; akrta-atmanah--without
self-realization; na--does not; enam--this; pasyanti--can see;
acetasah--undeveloped mind.
TRANSLATION
The endeavoring transcendentalist, who is situated in self-realization,
can see all this clearly. But those who are not situated in self-
realization cannot see what is taking place, though they may try to.
PURPORT
There are many transcendentalists on the path of spiritual self-
realization, but one who is not situated in self-realization cannot see
how things are changing in the body of the living entity. The word
yoginah is significant in this connection. In the present day there are
many so-called yogis, and there are many so-called associations of
yogis, but they are actually blind in the matter of self-realization.
They are simply addicted to some sort of gymnastic exercise and are
satisfied if the body is well-built and healthy. They have no other
information. They are called yatanto 'py akrtatmanah. Even though they
are endeavoring in a so-called yoga system, they are not self-realized.
Such people cannot understand the process of the transmigration of the
soul. Only those who are actually in the yoga system and have realized
the self, the world, and the Supreme Lord, in other words, the bhakti-
yogis, those engaged in pure devotional service in Krsna consciousness,
can understand how things are taking place.
TEXT 12
yad aditya-gatam tejo
jagad bhasayate 'khilam
yac candramasi yac cagnau
tat tejo viddhi mamakam
SYNONYMS
yat--that which; aditya-gatam--in the sunshine; tejah--splendor; jagat-
-the whole world; bhasayate--illuminates; akhilam--entirely; yat--that
which; candramasi--in the moon; yat--that which; ca--also; agnau--in
the fire; tat--that; tejah--splendor; viddhi--understand; mamakam--from
Me.
TRANSLATION
The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this whole
world, comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and the splendor of
fire are also from Me.
PURPORT
The unintelligent cannot understand how things are taking place. The
beginning of knowledge can be established by understanding what the
Lord explains here. Everyone sees the sun, moon, fire and electricity.
One should simply try to understand that the splendor of the sun, the
splendor of the moon, and the splendor of electricity or fire are
coming from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In such a conception of
life, the beginning of Krsna consciousness, lies a great deal of
advancement for the conditioned soul in this material world. The living
entities are essentially the parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, and
He is giving herewith the hint how they can come back to Godhead, back
to home.
From this verse we can understand that the sun is illuminating the
whole solar system. There are different universes and solar systems,
and there are different suns, moons and planets also, but in each
universe there is only one sun. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (10.21), the
moon is one of the stars (naksatranam aham sasi). Sunlight is due to
the spiritual effulgence in the spiritual sky of the Supreme Lord. With
the rise of the sun, the activities of human beings are set up. They
set fire to prepare their foodstuff, they set fire to start the
factories, etc. So many things are done with the help of fire.
Therefore sunrise, fire and moonlight are so pleasing to the living
entities. Without their help no living entity can live. So if one can
understand that the light and splendor of the sun, moon and fire are
emanating from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, then one's
Krsna consciousness will begin. By the moonshine, all the vegetables
are nourished. The moonshine is so pleasing that people can easily
understand that they are living by the mercy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead Krsna. Without His mercy there cannot be sun, without His
mercy there cannot be moon, and without His mercy there cannot be fire,
and without the help of sun, moon and fire, no one can live. These are
some thoughts to provoke Krsna consciousness in the conditioned soul.
TEXT 13
gam avisya ca bhutani
dharayamy aham ojasa
pusnami causadhih sarvah
somo bhutva rasatmakah
SYNONYMS
gam--the planets; avisya--entering; ca--also; bhutani--living entities;
dharayami--sustaining; aham--I; ojasa--by My energy; pusnami--
nourishing; ca--and; ausadhih--all vegetables; sarvah--all; somah--the
moon; bhutva--becoming; rasa-atmakah--supplying the juice.
TRANSLATION
I enter into each planet, and by My energy they stay in orbit. I become
the moon and thereby supply the juice of life to all vegetables.
PURPORT
It is understood that all the planets are floating in the air only by
the energy of the Lord. The Lord enters into every atom, every planet,
and every living being. That is discussed in the Brahma-samhita. It is
said there that one plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Paramatma, enters into the planets, the universe, the living
entity, and even into the atom. So due to His entrance, everything is
appropriately manifested. When the spirit soul is there, a living man
can float on the water, but when the living spark is out of the body
and the body is dead, it sinks. Of course when it is decomposed it
floats just like straw and other things, but as soon as the man is
dead, he at once sinks in the water. Similarly, all these planets are
floating in space, and this is due to the entrance of the supreme
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His energy is sustaining
each planet, just like a handful of dust. If someone holds a handful of
dust, there is no possibility of the dust's falling, but if one throws
it in the air, it will fall down. Similarly, these planets, which are
floating in the air, are actually held in the fist of the universal
form of the Supreme Lord. By His strength and energy, all moving and
unmoving things stay in their place. It is said in the Vedic hymns that
because of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sun is shining and
the planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the planets
would scatter, like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it is due to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the moon nourishes all
vegetables. Due to the moon's influence, the vegetables become
delicious. Without the moonshine, the vegetables can neither grow nor
taste succulent. Human society is working, living comfortably and
enjoying food due to the supply from the Supreme Lord. Otherwise,
mankind could not survive. The word rasatmakah is very significant.
Everything becomes palatable by the agency of the Supreme Lord through
the influence of the moon.
TEXT 14
aham vaisvanaro bhutva
praninam deham asritah
pranapana-samayuktah
pacamy annam catur-vidham
SYNONYMS
aham--I; vaisvanarah--by My plenary portion as the digesting fire;
bhutva--becoming; praninam--of all living entities; deham--body;
asritah--situated; prana--outgoing air; apana--down-going air;
samayuktah--keep balance; pacami--digest; annam--foodstuff; catuh-
vidham--four kinds of.
TRANSLATION
I am the fire of digestion in every living body, and I am the air of
life, outgoing and incoming, by which I digest the four kinds of
foodstuff.
PURPORT
According to Ayur-vedic sastra, we understand that there is a fire in
the stomach which digests all food sent there. When the fire is not
blazing, there is no hunger, and when the fire is in order we become
hungry. Sometimes when the fire is not going nicely, treatment is
required. In any case, this fire is representative of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Vedic mantras (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 5.9.1)
also confirm that the Supreme Lord or Brahman is situated in the form
of fire within the stomach and is digesting all kinds of foodstuff
(ayam agnir vaisvanaro yo 'yam antah puruse yenedam annam pacyate).
Therefore since He is helping the digestion of all kinds of foodstuff,
the living entity is not independent in the eating process. Unless the
Supreme Lord helps him in digesting, there is no possibility of eating.
He thus produces and digests foodstuff, and, by His grace, we are
enjoying life. In the Vedanta-sutra (1.2.27) this is also confirmed.
Sabdadibhyo 'ntah pratisthanac ca: the Lord is situated within the
sound and within the body, within the air and even within the stomach
as the digestive force. There are four kinds of foodstuff, some are
swallowed, some are chewed, some are licked up, and some are sucked,
and He is the digestive force for all of them.
TEXT 15
sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam ca
vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo
vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham
SYNONYMS
sarvasya--of all living beings; ca--and; aham--I; hrdi--in the heart;
sannivistah--being situated; mattah--from Me; smrtih--remembrance;
jnanam--knowledge; apohanam ca--and forgetfulness; vedaih--by the
Vedas; ca--also; sarvaih--all; aham--I am; eva--certainly; vedyah--
knowable; vedanta-krt--the compiler of the Vedanta; veda-vit--the
knower of the Vedas; eva--certainly; ca--and; aham--I.
TRANSLATION
I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas I am to be known; indeed
I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is situated as Paramatma in everyone's heart, and it
is from Him that all activities are initiated. The living entity
forgets everything of his past life, but he has to act according to the
direction of the Supreme Lord, who is witness to all his work.
Therefore he begins his work according to his past deeds. Required
knowledge is supplied to him, and remembrance is given to him, and he
forgets, also, about his past life. Thus, the Lord is not only all-
pervading; He is also localized in every individual heart. He awards
the different fruitive results. He is not only worshipable as the
impersonal Brahman, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and the
localized Paramatma, but as the form of the incarnation of the Vedas as
well. The Vedas give the right direction to the people so that they can
properly mold their lives and come back to Godhead, back to home. The
Vedas offer knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and
Krsna in His incarnation as Vyasadeva is the compiler of the Vedanta-
sutra. The commentation on the Vedanta-sutra by Vyasadeva in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam gives the real understanding of Vedanta-sutra. The
Supreme Lord is so full that for the deliverance of the conditioned
soul He is the supplier and digester of foodstuff, the witness of his
activity, the giver of knowledge in the form of Vedas and as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, the teacher of the Bhagavad-
gita. He is worshipable by the conditioned soul. Thus God is all-good;
God is all-merciful.
Antah-pravistah sasta jananam. The living entity forgets as soon as he
quits his present body, but he begins his work again, initiated by the
Supreme Lord. Although he forgets, the Lord gives him the intelligence
to renew his work where he ended in his last life. So not only does a
living entity enjoy or suffer in this world according to the dictation
from the Supreme Lord situated locally in the heart, but he receives
the opportunity to understand the Vedas from Him. If one is serious to
understand the Vedic knowledge, then Krsna gives the required
intelligence. Why does He present the Vedic knowledge for
understanding? Because a living entity individually needs to understand
Krsna. Vedic literature confirms this: yo 'sau sarvair vedair giyate.
In all Vedic literature, beginning from the four Vedas, Vedanta-sutra
and the Upanisads and Puranas, the glories of the Supreme Lord are
celebrated. By performing Vedic rituals, discussing the Vedic
philosophy and worshiping the Lord in devotional service, He is
attained. Therefore the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Krsna.
The Vedas give us direction to understand Krsna and the process of
understanding. The ultimate goal is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Vedanta-sutra (1.1.4) confirms this in the following words: tat tu
samanvayat. One can attain perfection by understanding Vedic
literature, and one can understand his relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by performing the different processes. Thus one
can approach Him and at the end one can attain the supreme goal, who is
no other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this verse,
however, the purpose of the Vedas, the understanding of the Vedas, and
the goal of the Vedas are clearly defined.
TEXT 16
dvav imau purusau loke
ksaras caksara eva ca
ksarah sarvani bhutani
kuta-stho 'ksara ucyate
SYNONYMS
dvau--two; imau--in this (world); purusau--living entities; loke--in
the world; ksarah--fallible; ca--and; aksarah--infallible; eva--
certainly; ca--and; ksarah--the fallible; sarvani--all; bhutani--living
entities; kuta-sthah--in oneness; aksarah--infallible; ucyate--is said.
TRANSLATION
There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In
the material world every entity is fallible, and in the spiritual world
every entity is called infallible.
PURPORT
As already explained, the Lord in His incarnation as Vyasadeva compiled
the Vedanta-sutra. Here the Lord is giving, in summary, the contents of
the Vedanta-sutra. He says that the living entities, who are
innumerable, can be divided into two classes--the fallible and the
infallible. The living entities are eternally separated parts and
parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When they are in contact
with the material world, they are called jiva-bhuta, and the Sanskrit
words given here, ksarah sarvani bhutani, mean that they are fallible.
Those who are in oneness with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
however, are called infallible. Oneness does not mean that they have no
individuality, but that there is no disunity. They are all agreeable to
the purpose of the creation. Of course, in the spiritual world, there
is no such thing as creation, but since the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, as stated in the Vedanta-sutra, is the source of all
emanations, that conception is explained.
According to the statement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord
Krsna, there are two classes of men. The Vedas give evidence of this,
so there is no doubt about it. The living entities, who are struggling
in this world with the mind and five senses, have their material bodies
which are changing as long as the living entities are conditioned.
One's body changes due to contact with matter; matter is changing, so
the living entity appears to be changing. But in the spiritual world
the body is not made of matter; therefore there is no change. In the
material world the living entity undergoes six changes--birth, growth,
duration, reproduction, then dwindling and vanishing. These are the
changes of the material body. But in the spiritual world the body does
not change; there is no old age, there is no birth, there is no death.
There all exists in oneness. It is more clearly explained as ksarah
sarvani bhutani: any living entity who has come in contact with matter,
beginning from the first created being, Brahma, down to a small ant, is
changing its body; therefore they are all fallible. In the spiritual
world, however, they are always liberated in oneness.
TEXT 17
uttamah purusas tv anyah
paramatmety udahrtah
yo loka-trayam avisya
bibharty avyaya isvarah
SYNONYMS
uttamah--the best; purusah--personality; tu--but; anyah--another;
parama--the supreme; atma--self; iti--thus; udahrtah--is said; yah--one
who; loka--of the universe; trayam--the three divisions; avisya--
entering; bibharti--maintaining; avyayah--inexhaustible; isvarah--the
Lord.
TRANSLATION
Besides these two, there is the greatest living personality, the Lord
Himself, who has entered into these worlds and is maintaining them.
PURPORT
This verse is very nicely expressed in the Katha Upanisad (2.2.13) and
Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.13). It is clearly stated there that above the
innumerable living entities, some of whom are conditioned and some of
whom are liberated, there is the Supreme Personality who is Paramatma.
The Upanisadic verse runs as follows: nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam.
The purport is that amongst all the living entities, both conditioned
and liberated, there is one supreme living personality, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who maintains them and gives them all facility
of enjoyment according to different work. That Supreme Personality of
Godhead is situated in everyone's heart as Paramatma. A wise man who
can understand Him is eligible to attain the perfect peace, not others.
It is incorrect to think of the Supreme Lord and the living entities as
being on the same level or equal in all respects. There is always the
question of superiority and inferiority in their personalities. This
particular word uttama is very significant. No one can surpass the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Loke is also significant because in the
paurusa, a Vedic literature, it is stated, lokyate vedartho 'nena. This
Supreme Lord in His localized aspect as Paramatma explains the purpose
of the Vedas. The following verse also appears in the Vedas (Chandogya
Upanisad 8.12.3):
tavad esa samprasado 'smac
charirat samutthaya param
jyoti-rupam sampadya svena
rupenabhinispadyate sa uttamah purusah.
"The Supersoul coming out of the body enters the impersonal
brahmajyoti; then in His form He remains in His spiritual identity.
That Supreme is called the Supreme Personality." This means that the
Supreme Personality is exhibiting and diffusing His spiritual
effulgence, which is the ultimate illumination. That Supreme
Personality also has a localized aspect as Paramatma. By incarnating
Himself as the son of Satyavati and Parasara, He explains the Vedic
knowledge as Vyasadeva.
TEXT 18
yasmat ksaram atito 'ham
aksarad api cottamah
ato 'smi loke vede ca
prathitah purusottamah
SYNONYMS
yasmat--because; ksaram--the fallible; atitah--transcendental; aham--I;
aksarat--from the infallible; api--better than that; ca--and; uttamah--
the best; atah--therefore; asmi--I am; loke--in the world; vede--in the
Vedic literature; ca--and; prathitah--celebrated; purusa-uttamah--as
the Supreme Personality.
TRANSLATION
Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the
infallible, and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in the
world and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person.
PURPORT
No one can surpass the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna--neither
the conditioned soul nor the liberated soul. He is, therefore, the
greatest of personalities. Now it is clear here that the living
entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead are individuals. The
difference is that the living entities, either in the conditioned state
or in the liberated state, cannot surpass in quantity the inconceivable
potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
yo mam evam asammudho
janati purusottamam
sa sarva-vid bhajati mam
sarva-bhavena bharata
SYNONYMS
yah--anyone; mam--unto Me; evam--certainly; asammudhah--without a
doubt; janati--knows; purusa-uttamam--the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; sah--he; sarva-vit--knower of everything; bhajati--renders
devotional service; mam--unto Me; sarva-bhavena--in all respects;
bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Whoever knows Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, without
doubting, is to be understood as the knower of everything, and He
therefore engages himself in full devotional service, O son of Bharata.
PURPORT
There are many philosophical speculations about the constitutional
position of the living entities and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Now in
this verse the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains that
anyone who knows Lord Krsna as the Supreme Person is actually the
knower of everything. The imperfect knower goes on simply speculating
about the Absolute Truth, but the perfect knower, without wasting his
valuable time, engages directly in Krsna consciousness, the devotional
service of the Supreme Lord. Throughout the whole of Bhagavad-gita,
this fact is being stressed at every step. And still there are so many
stubborn commentators on Bhagavad-gita who consider the Supreme
Absolute Truth and the living entities to be one and the same.
The Vedic knowledge is called sruti, learning by aural reception. One
should actually receive the Vedic messages from authorities like Krsna
and His representatives. Here Krsna distinguishes everything very
nicely, and one should hear from this source. Simply to hear like the
hogs is not sufficient; one must be able to understand from the
authorities. It is not that one should simply speculate academically.
One should submissively hear from Bhagavad-gita that these living
entities are always subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Anyone who is able to understand this, according to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, knows the purpose of the Vedas; no
one else knows the purpose of the Vedas.
The word bhajati is very significant. In many places the word bhajati
is expressed in relationship with the service of the Supreme Lord. If a
person is engaged in full Krsna consciousness in devotional service of
the Lord, it is to be understood that he has understood all the Vedic
knowledge. In the Vaisnava parampara it is said that if one is engaged
in the devotional service of Krsna, then there is no need for any other
spiritual process for understanding the Supreme Absolute Truth. He has
already come to the point, because he is engaged in the devotional
service of the Lord. He has ended all preliminary processes of
understanding; similarly, if anyone, after speculating for hundreds of
thousands of lives, does not come to the point that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and that one has to surrender there, all
his speculation for so many years and lives is a useless waste of time.
TEXT 20
iti guhyatamam sastram
idam uktam mayanagha
etad buddhva buddhiman syat
krta-krtyas ca bharata
SYNONYMS
iti--thus; guhya-tamam--the most confidential; sastram--revealed
scripture; idam--this; uktam--disclosed; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinless
one; etat--this; buddhva--understanding; buddhi-man--intelligent; syat-
-one becomes; krta-krtyah--the most perfect; ca--and; bharata--O son of
Bharata.
TRANSLATION
This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O sinless
one, and it is disclosed now by Me. Whoever understands this will
become wise, and his endeavors will know perfection.
PURPORT
The Lord clearly explains here that this is the substance of all
revealed scriptures. And one should understand this as it is given by
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus one will become intelligent
and perfect in transcendental knowledge. In other words, by
understanding this philosophy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
engaging in His transcendental service, everyone can become freed from
all contaminations of the modes of material nature. Devotional service
is a process of spiritual understanding. Wherever devotional service
exists, the material contamination cannot coexist. Devotional service
to the Lord and the Lord Himself are one and the same because they are
spiritual--the internal energy of the Supreme Lord. The Lord is said to
be the sun, and ignorance is called darkness. Where the sun is present,
there is no question of darkness. Therefore, whenever devotional
service is present under the proper guidance of a bona fide spiritual
master, there is no question of ignorance.
Everyone must take to this consciousness of Krsna and engage in
devotional service to become intelligent and purified. Unless one comes
to this position of understanding Krsna and engages in devotional
service, however intelligent he may be in the estimation of some common
man, he is not perfectly intelligent.
The word anagha, by which Arjuna is addressed, is significant. Anagha,
"O sinless one," means that unless one is free from all sinful
reactions it is very difficult to understand Krsna. One has to become
free from all contamination, all sinful activities; then he can
understand. But devotional service is so pure and potent that once one
is engaged in devotional service he automatically comes to the stage of
sinlessness.
While performing devotional service in the association of pure devotees
in full Krsna consciousness, there are certain things which require to
be vanquished altogether. The most important thing one has to surmount
is weakness of the heart. The first falldown is caused by the desire to
lord it over material nature. Thus one gives up the transcendental
loving service of the Supreme Lord. The second weakness of the heart is
that as one increases the propensity of lording it over material
nature, he becomes attached to matter and the possession of matter. The
problems of material existence are due to these weaknesses of the
heart.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fifteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Purusottama-yoga, the Yoga of
the Supreme Person.