Chapter 13
Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness
TEXTS 1-2
arjuna uvaca
prakrtim purusam caiva
ksetram ksetra-jnam eva ca
etad veditum icchami
jnanam jneyam ca kesava
sri-bhagavan uvaca
idam sariram kaunteya
ksetram ity abhidhiyate
etad yo vetti tam prahuh
ksetra-jna iti tad-vidah
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; prakrtim--nature; purusam--the enjoyer; ca-
-also; eva--certainly; ksetram--body; ksetra-jnam--knower of the body;
eva--certainly; ca--also; etat--all this; veditum--to understand;
icchami--I wish; jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the object of knowledge;
ca--also; kesava--O Krsna; sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of
Godhead said; idam--this; sariram--body; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
ksetram--the field; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--is called; etat--this; yah-
-anyone; vetti--knows; tam--he; prahuh--is called; ksetra-jnah--knower
of the body; iti--thus; tat-vidah--one who knows.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O my dear Krsna, I wish to know about prakrti [nature],
purusa [the enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and of
knowledge and of the end of knowledge.
The Blessed Lord said: This body, O son of Kunti, is called the field,
and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.
PURPORT
Arjuna was inquisitive about prakrtil, or nature, purusa, the enjoyer,
ksetra, the field, ksetra-jna, its knower, and of knowledge and the
object of knowledge. When he inquired about all these, Krsna said that
this body is called the field and that one who knows this body is
called the knower of the field. This body is the field of activity for
the conditioned soul. The conditioned soul is entrapped in material
existence, and he attempts to lord over material nature. And so,
according to his capacity to dominate material nature, he gets a field
of activity. That field of activity is the body. And what is the body?
The body is made of senses. The conditioned soul wants to enjoy sense
gratification, and, according to his capacity to enjoy sense
gratification, he is offered a body, or field of activity. Therefore
the body is called ksetra, or the field of activity for the conditioned
soul. Now, the person who identifies himself with the body, is called
ksetra-jna, the knower of the field. It is not very difficult to
understand the difference between the field and its knower, the body
and the knower of the body. Any person can consider that from childhood
to old age he undergoes so many changes of body and yet is still one
person, remaining. Thus there is a difference between the knower of the
field of activities and the actual field of activities. A living
conditioned soul can thus understand that he is different from the
body. It is described in the beginning--dehino 'smin--that the living
entity is within the body and that the body is changing from childhood
to boyhood and from boyhood to youth and from youth to old age, and the
person who owns the body knows that the body is changing. The owner is
distinctly ksetra-jna. Sometimes we understand that, "I am happy," "I
am a man," "I am a woman," "I am a dog," "I am a cat." These are the
bodily designations of the knower. But the knower is different from the
field. Although we use many articles--our clothes, etc.--we know that
we are different from the things used. Similarly, we also understand by
a little contemplation that we are different from the body.
In the first six chapters of Bhagavad-gita the knower of the body, the
living entity, and the position by which he can understand the Supreme
Lord are described. In the middle six chapters of the Gita, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and the relationship between the individual soul
and the Supersoul in regard to devotional service are described. The
superior position of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the
subordinate position of the individual soul are definitely defined in
these chapters. The living entities are subordinate under all
circumstances, but in their forgetfulness they are suffering. When
enlightened by pious activities, they approach the Supreme Lord in
different capacities--as the distressed, those in want of money, the
inquisitive, and those in search of knowledge. That is also described.
Now, starting with the Thirteenth Chapter, how the living entity comes
in contact with material nature, how he is delivered by the Supreme
Lord through the different methods of fruitive activities, cultivation
of knowledge, and the discharge of devotional service are explained.
Although the living entity is completely different from the material
body, he somehow becomes related. This also is explained.
TEXT 3
ksetra-jnam capi mam viddhi
sarva-ksetresu bharata
ksetra-ksetrajnayor jnanam
yat taj jnanam matam mama
SYNONYMS
ksetra-jnam--the knower; ca--also; api--certainly; mam--Me; viddhi--
know; sarva--all; ksetresu--in bodily fields; bharata--O son of
Bharata; ksetra--field of activities (the body); ksetra-jnayoh--the
knower of the field; jnanam--knowledge; yat--that which is taught; tat-
-that; jnanam--knowledge; matam--opinion; mama--that.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in
all bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is called
knowledge. That is My opinion.
PURPORT
While discussing the subject of this body and the knower of the body,
the soul and the Supersoul, we shall find three different topics of
study: the Lord, the living entity, and matter. In every field of
activities, in every body, there are two souls: the individual soul and
the Supersoul. Because the Supersoul is the plenary expansion of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, Krsna says, "I am also the
knower, but I am not the individual knower of the body. I am the
superknower. I am present in every body as the Paramatma, or
Supersoul."
One who studies the subject matter of the field of activity and the
knower of the field very minutely, in terms of this Bhagavad-gita, can
attain to knowledge.
The Lord says, "I am the knower of the field of activities in every
individual body." The individual may be the knower of his own body, but
he is not in knowledge of other bodies. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is present as the Supersoul in all bodies, knows
everything about all bodies. He knows all the different bodies of all
the various species of life. A citizen may know everything about his
patch of land, but the king knows not only his palace but also all the
properties possessed by the individual citizens. Similarly, one may be
the proprietor of the body individually, but the Supreme Lord is the
proprietor of all bodies. The king is the original proprietor of the
kingdom, and the citizen is the secondary proprietor. Similarly, the
Supreme Lord is the supreme proprietor of all bodies.
The body consists of the senses. The Supreme Lord is Hrsikesa, Which
means "the controller of the senses." He is the original controller of
the senses, just as the king is the original controller of all the
activities of the state; the citizens are secondary controllers. The
Lord says, "I am also the knower." This means that He is the
superknower; the individual soul knows only his particular body. In the
Vedic literature, it is stated as follows:
ksetrani hi sarirani
bijam capi subhasubhe
tani vetti sa yogatma
tatah ksetra-jna ucyate
This body is called the ksetra, and within it dwells the owner of the
body and the Supreme Lord who knows both the body and the owner of the
body. Therefore He is called the knower of all fields. The distinction
between the field of activities, the knower of activities, and the
supreme knower of activities is described as follows. Perfect knowledge
of the constitution of the body, the constitution of the individual
soul, and the constitution of the Supersoul is known in terms of Vedic
literature as jnana. That is the opinion of Krsna. To understand both
the soul and the Supersoul as one yet distinct is knowledge. One who
does not understand the field of activity and the knower of activity is
not in perfect knowledge. One has to understand the position of
prakrti, nature, purusa, the enjoyer of the nature, and isvara, the
knower who dominates or controls nature and the individual soul. One
should not confuse the three in their different capacities. One should
not confuse the painter, the painting and the easel. This material
world, which is the field of activities, is nature, and the enjoyer of
nature is the living entity, and above them both is the supreme
controller, the Personality of Godhead. It is stated in the Vedic
language (in the Svetasvatara Upanisad 1.12), bhokta bhogyam preritaram
ca matva. sarvam proktam tri vidham-brahmam etat. There are three
Brahman conceptions: prakrti is Brahman as the field of activities, and
the jiva (individual soul) is also Brahman and is trying to control
material nature, and the controller of both of them is also Brahman,
but He is the factual controller.
In this chapter it will be also explained that out of the two knowers,
one is fallible and the other is infallible. One is superior and the
other is subordinate. One who understands the two knowers of the field
to be one and the same contradicts the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
who states here very clearly, "I am also the knower of the field of
activity." One who misunderstands a rope to be a serpent is not in
knowledge. There are different kinds of bodies, and there are different
owners of the bodies. Because each individual soul has his individual
capacity for lording it over material nature, there are different
bodies. But the Supreme also is present in them as the controller. The
word ca is significant for it indicates the total number of bodies.
That is the opinion of Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana: Krsna is the
Supersoul present in each and every body apart from the individual
soul. And Krsna explicitly says here that the Supersoul is the
controller of both the field of activities and the finite enjoyer.
TEXT 4
tat ksetram yac ca yadrk ca
yad-vikari yatas ca yat
sa ca yo yat-prabhavas ca
tat samasena me srnu
SYNONYMS
tat--that; ksetram--field of activities; yat--as; ca--also; yadrk--as
it is; ca--also; yat--what is; vikari--changes; yatah--from which; ca--
also; yat--which; sah--he; ca--also; yah--one; yat--which; prabhavah
ca--influence also; tat--that; samasena--in summary; me--from Me; srnu-
-understand.
TRANSLATION
Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how
it is constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, who
that knower of the field of activities is, and what his influences are.
PURPORT
The Lord is describing the field of activities and the knower of the
field of activities in their constitutional positions. One has to know
how this body is constituted, the materials of which this body is made,
under whose control this body is working, how the changes are taking
place, wherefrom the changes are coming, what the causes are, what the
reasons are, what the ultimate goal of the individual soul is, and what
the actual form of the individual soul is. One should also know the
distinction between the individual living soul and the Supersoul, their
different influences, their potentials, etc. One just has to understand
this Bhagavad-gita directly from the description given by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and all this will be clarified. But one should
be careful not to consider the Supreme Personality of Godhead in every
body and individual soul to be the jiva. This is something like
equalizing the potent and the impotent.
TEXT 5
rsibhir bahudha gitam
chandobhir vividhaih prthak
brahma-sutra-padais caiva
hetumadbhir viniscitaih
SYNONYMS
rsibhih--by the wise sages; bahudha--in many ways; gitam--described;
chandobhih--Vedic hymns; vividhaih--in various; prthak--variously;
brahma-sutra--the Vedanta; padaih--aphorisms; ca--also; eva--certainly;
hetu-madbhih--with cause and effect; viniscitaih--ascertain.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of
activities is described by various sages in various Vedic writings--
especially in the Vedanta-sutra--and is presented with all reasoning as
to cause and effect.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the highest authority in
explaining this knowledge. Still, as a matter of course, learned
scholars and standard authorities always give evidence from previous
authorities. Krsna is explaining this most controversial point
regarding the duality and nonduality of the soul and the Supersoul by
referring to the scriptures, the Vedanta, which are accepted as
authority. First, He says, "This is according to different sages." As
far as the sages are concerned, besides Himself, Vyasadeva, the author
of the Vedanta-sutra, is a great sage, and in the Vedanta-sutra duality
is perfectly explained. And Vyasadeva's father, Parasara, was also a
great sage, and he writes in his books of religiosity: aham tvam ca
tathanye... "we--you, I and the various other living entities--are all
transcendental, although in material bodies. Now we are fallen into the
ways of the three modes of material nature according to our different
karma. As such, some are on higher levels, and some are in the lower
nature. The higher and lower natures exist due to ignorance and are
being manifested in an infinite number of living entities. But the
Supersoul, which is infallible, is uncontaminated by the three
qualities of nature and is transcendental." Similarly, in the original
Vedas, a distinction between the soul, the Supersoul and the body is
made, especially in the Katha Upanisad.
There is a manifestation of the Supreme Lord's energy known as anna-
maya, by which one depends simply upon food for existence. This is a
materialistic realization of the Supreme. Then there is prana-maya;
this means that after realizing the Supreme Absolute Truth in
foodstuff, one can realize the Absolute Truth in the living symptoms,
or life forms. In jnana-maya the living symptom develops to the point
of thinking, feeling and willing. Then there is Brahman realization and
realization called vijnana-maya by which the living entity's mind and
life symptoms are distinguished from the living entity himself. The
next and supreme stage is ananda-maya, realization of the all-blissful
nature. Thus there are five stages of Brahman realization, which are
called brahma puccham. Out of these the first three--anna-maya, prana-
maya and jnana-maya--involve the fields of activities of the living
entities. Transcendental to all these fields of activities is the
Supreme Lord, who is called ananda-maya. In the Vedanta-sutra also the
Supreme is called, ananda-mayo 'bhyasat: the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is by nature full of joy, and to enjoy His transcendental
bliss, He expands into vijnana-maya, prana-maya, jnana-maya, and anna-
maya. In this field of activities the living entity is considered to be
the enjoyer, and different from him is the ananda-maya. That means that
if the living entity decides to enjoy, in dovetailing himself with the
ananda-maya, then he becomes perfect. This is the real picture of the
Supreme Lord, as the supreme knower of the field, the living entity as
the subordinate knower, and the nature of the field of activities.
TEXTS 6-7
maha-bhutany ahankaro
buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyani dasaikam ca
panca cendriya-gocarah
iccha dvesah sukham duhkham
sanghatas cetana dhrtih
etat ksetram samasena
sa-vikaram udahrtam
SYNONYMS
maha-bhutani--great 
elements; 
ahankarah--false 
ego; 
buddhih--
intelligence; avyaktam--the unmanifested; eva--certainly; ca--also;
indriyani--senses; dasa-ekam--eleven; ca--also; panca--five; ca--also;
indriya-go-carah--objects of the senses; iccha--desire; dvesah--hatred;
sukham--happiness; duhkham--distress; sanghatah--the aggregate; cetana-
-living symptoms; dhrtih--conviction; etat--all this; ksetram--the
field of activities; samasena--in summary; sa-vikaram--interaction;
udahrtam--exemplified.
TRANSLATION
The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the
ten senses, the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred,
happiness, distress, the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions-
-all these are considered, in summary, to be the field of activities
and its interactions.
PURPORT
From all the authoritative statements of the great sages, the Vedic
hymns and the aphorisms of the Vedanta-sutra, the components of this
world are earth, water, fire, air and ether. These are the five great
elements (maha-bhuta). Then there are false ego, intelligence and the
unmanifested stage of the three modes of nature. Then there are five
senses for acquiring knowledge: the eyes, ears, nose, tongue and touch.
Then five working senses: voice, legs, hands, anus and genitals. Then,
above the senses, there is the mind, which is within and which can be
called the sense within. Therefore, including the mind, there are
eleven senses altogether. Then there are the five objects of the
senses: smell, taste, form, touch and sound. Now the aggregate of these
twenty-four elements is called the field of activity. If one makes an
analytical study of these twenty-four subjects, then he can very well
understand the field of activity. Then there is desire, hatred,
pleasure and pain, which are interactions, representations of the five
great elements in the gross body. The living symptoms, represented by
consciousness and conviction, are the manifestation of the subtle body-
-the mind, ego and intelligence. These subtle elements are included
within the field of activities.
The five great elements are a gross representation of the subtle false
ego. They are a representation in the material conception.
Consciousness is represented by intelligence, of which the unmanifested
stage is the three modes of material nature. The unmanifested three
modes of material nature is called pradhana.
One who desires to know the twenty-four elements in detail along with
their interactions should study the philosophy in more detail. In
Bhagavad-gita, a summary only is given.
The body is the representation of all these factors, and there are
changes of the body, which are six in number: the body is born, it
grows, it stays, it produces by-products, then it begins to decay, and
at the last stage it vanishes. Therefore the field is a nonpermanent
material thing. However, the ksetra-jna, the knower of the field, its
proprietor, is different.
TEXTS 8-12
amanitvam adambhitvam
ahimsa ksantir arjavam
acaryopasanam saucam
sthairyam atma-vinigrahah
indriyarthesu vairagyam
anahankara eva ca
janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-
duhkha-dosanudarsanam
asaktir anabhisvangah
putra-dara-grhadisu
nityam ca sama-cittatvam
istanistopapattisu
mayi cananya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicarini
vivikta-desa-sevitvam
aratir jana-samsadi
adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam
tattva-jnanartha-darsanam
etaj jnanam iti proktam
ajnanam yad ato 'nyatha
SYNONYMS
amanitvam--humility; adambhitvam--pridelessness; ahimsa--nonviolence;
ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--simplicity; acarya-upasanam--approaching a
bona 
fide spiritual master; 
saucam--cleanliness; 
sthairyam--
steadfastness; atma-vinigrahah--control; indriya-arthesu--in the matter
of the senses; vairagyam--renunciation; anahankarah--being without
false egoism; eva--certainly; ca--also; janma--birth; mrtyu--death;
jara--old age; vyadhi--disease; duhkha--distress; dosa--fault;
anudarsanam--observing; asaktih--without attachment; anabhisvangah--
without association; putra--sons; dara--wife; grha-adisu--home, etc.;
nityam--eternal; 
ca--also; 
sama-cittatvam--equilibrium; 
ista--
desirable; anista--undesirable; upapattisu--having obtained; mayi--unto
Me; ca--also; ananya-yogena--by devotional service; bhaktih--devotion;
avyabhicarini--constant, unalloyed; vivikta--solitary; desa--place;
sevitvam--aspiring; aratih--without attachment; jana--to people in
general; samsadi--mass; adhyatma--pertaining to the self; jnana--
knowledge; nityatvam--eternity; tattva-jnana--knowledge of the truth;
artha--the object; darsanam--philosophy; etat--all this; jnanam--
knowledge; iti--thus; proktam--declared; ajnanam--ignorance; yat--that
which; atah--from this; anyatha--others.
TRANSLATION
Humility, 
pridelessness, 
nonviolence, 
tolerance, 
simplicity,
approaching a bona fide spiritual master, cleanliness, steadiness and
self-control; renunciation of the objects of sense gratification;
absence of false ego, the perception of the evil of birth, death, old
age and disease; nonattachment to children, wife, home and the rest and
even-mindedness amid pleasant and unpleasant events; constant and
unalloyed devotion to Me, resorting to solitary places, detachment from
the general mass of people; accepting the importance of self-
realization, and philosophical search for the Absolute Truth--all these
I thus declare to be knowledge and what is contrary to these is
ignorance.
PURPORT
This process of knowledge is sometimes misunderstood by less
intelligent men as being the interaction of the field of activity. But
actually this is the real process of knowledge. If one accepts this
process, then the possibility of approaching the Absolute Truth exists.
This is not the interaction of the twenty-four elements, as described
before. This is actually the means to get out of it. Of all the
descriptions of the process of knowledge, the most important point is
described in the first line of the eleventh verse. Mayi cananya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicarini: the process of knowledge terminates in unalloyed
devotional service to the Lord. So, if one does not approach, or is not
able to approach, the transcendental service of the Lord, then the
other nineteen items are of no particular value. But, if one takes to
devotional service in full Krsna consciousness, the other nineteen
items automatically develop within him. The principle of accepting a
spiritual master, as mentioned in the eighth verse, is essential. Even
for one who takes to devotional service, it is most important.
Transcendental life begins when one accepts a bona fide spiritual
master. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, clearly states
here that this process of knowledge is the actual path. Anything
speculated beyond this is nonsense.
As for the knowledge outlined here, the items may be analyzed as
follows: Humility means that one should not be anxious to have the
satisfaction of being honored by others. The material conception of
life makes us very eager to receive honor from others, but from the
point of view of a man in perfect knowledge--who knows that he is not
this body--anything, honor or dishonor, pertaining to this body is
useless. One should not be hankering after this material deception.
People are very anxious to be famous for their religion, and
consequently sometimes it is found that without understanding the
principles of religion, one enters into some group, which is not
actually following religious principles, and then wants to advertise
himself as a religious mentor. As for actual advancement in spiritual
science, one should have a test to see how far he is progressing. He
can judge by these items.
Nonviolence is generally taken to mean not killing or destroying the
body, but actually nonviolence means not to put others into distress.
People in general are trapped by ignorance in the material concept of
life, and they perpetually suffer material pains. So, unless one
elevates people to spiritual knowledge, one is practicing violence. One
should try his best to distribute real knowledge to the people, so that
they may become enlightened and leave this material entanglement. That
is nonviolence.
Tolerance means that one should be practiced to bear insult and
dishonor from others. If one is engaged in the advancement of spiritual
knowledge, there will be so many insults and so much dishonor from
others. This is expected because material nature is so constituted.
Even a boy like Prahlada, who, only five years old, was engaged in the
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, was endangered when his father
became antagonistic to his devotion. The father tried to kill him in so
many ways, but Prahlada tolerated him. So, for making advancement in
spiritual knowledge,  there may be many impediments, but we should be
tolerant and continue our progress with determination.
Simplicity means that without diplomacy one should be so straight-
forward that he can disclose the real truth even to an enemy. As for
acceptance of the spiritual master, that is essential, because without
the instruction of a bona fide spiritual master, one cannot progress in
the spiritual science. One should approach the spiritual master with
all humility and offer him all services so that he will be pleased to
bestow his blessings upon the disciple. Because a bona fide spiritual
master is a representative of Krsna, if he bestows any blessings upon
his disciple, that will make the disciple immediately advanced without
the disciple's following the regulative principles. Or, the regulative
principles will be easier for one who has served the spiritual master
without reservation.
Cleanliness is essential for making advancement in spiritual life.
There are two kinds of cleanliness: external and internal. External
cleanliness means taking a bath, but for internal cleanliness, one has
to think of Krsna always and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. This process
cleans the accumulated dust of past karma from the mind.
Steadiness means that one should be very determined to make progress in
spiritual life. Without such determination, one cannot make tangible
progress. And self-control means that one should not accept anything
which is detrimental to the path of spiritual progress. One should
become accustomed to this and reject anything which is against the path
of spiritual progress. This is real renunciation. The senses are so
strong that they are always anxious to have sense gratification. One
should not cater to these demands, which are not necessary. The senses
should only be gratified to keep the body fit so that one can discharge
his duty in advancing in spiritual life. The most important and
uncontrollable sense is the tongue. If one can control the tongue, then
there is every possibility of controlling the other senses. The
function of the tongue is to taste and to vibrate. Therefore, by
systematic regulation, the tongue should always be engaged in tasting
the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna and chanting Hare Krsna. As
far as the eyes are concerned, they should not be allowed to see
anything but the beautiful form of Krsna. That will control the eyes.
Similarly, the ears should be engaged in hearing about Krsna and the
nose in smelling the flowers offered to Krsna. This is the process of
devotional service, and it is understood here that Bhagavad-gita is
simply expounding the science of devotional service. Devotional service
is the main and sole objective. Unintelligent commentators on the
Bhagavad-gita try to divert the mind of the reader to other subjects,
but there is no other subject in Bhagavad-gita than devotional service.
False ego means accepting this body as oneself. When one understands
that he is not his body and is spirit soul, that is real ego. Ego is
there. False ego is condemned, but not real ego. In the Vedic
literature (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 1.4.10) it is said, aham brahmasmi:
I am Brahman, I am spirit. This "I am," the sense of self, also exists
in the liberated stage of self-realization. This sense of "I am" is
ego, but when the sense of "I am" is applied to this false body it is
false ego. When the sense of self is applied to reality, that is real
ego. There are some philosophers who say we should give up our ego, but
we cannot give up our ego, because ego means identity. We ought, of
course, to give up the false identification with the body.
One should try to understand the distress of accepting birth, death,
old age and disease. There are descriptions in various Vedic
literatures of birth. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam the world of the unborn,
the child's stay in the womb of the mother, its suffering, etc., are
all very graphically described. It should be thoroughly understood that
birth is distressful. Because we forget how much distress we have
suffered within the womb of the mother, we do not make any solution to
the repetition of birth and death. Similarly at the time of death there
are all kinds of sufferings, and they are also mentioned in the
authoritative scriptures. These should be discussed. And as far as
disease and old age are concerned, everyone gets practical experience.
No one wants to be diseased, and no one wants to become old, but there
is no avoiding these. Unless we have a pessimistic view of this
material life, considering the distresses of birth, death, old age and
disease, there is no impetus for our making advancement in spiritual
life.
As for detachment from children, wife and home, it is not meant that
one should have no feeling for these. They are natural objects of
affection. But when they are not favorable to spiritual progress, then
one should not be attached to them. The best process for making the
home pleasant is Krsna consciousness. If one is in full Krsna
consciousness, he can make his home very happy, because this process of
Krsna consciousness is very easy. One need only chant Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare, accept the remnants of foodstuffs offered to Krsna, have some
discussion on books like Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam, and
engage oneself in Deity worship. These four will make one happy. One
should train the members of his family in this way. The family members
can sit down morning and evening and chant together Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. If one can mold his family life in this way to develop Krsna
consciousness, following these four principles, then there is no need
to change from family life to renounced life. But if it is not
congenial, not favorable for spiritual advancement, then family life
should be abandoned. One must sacrifice everything to realize or serve
Krsna, just as Arjuna did. Arjuna did not want to kill his family
members, but when he understood that these family members were
impediments to his Krsna realization, he accepted the instruction of
Krsna and fought and killed them. In all cases, one should be detached
from the happiness and distress of family life, because in this world
one can never be fully happy or fully miserable.
Happiness and distress are concomitant factors of material life. One
should learn to tolerate, as advised in Bhagavad-gita. One can never
restrict the coming and going of happiness and distress, so one should
be detached from the materialistic way of life and be automatically
equipoised in both cases. Generally, when we get something desirable,
we are very happy, and when we get something undesirable, we are
distressed. But if we are actually in the spiritual position, these
things will not agitate us. To reach that stage, we have to practice
unbreakable devotional service; Devotional service to Krsna without
deviation means engaging oneself in the nine processes of devotional
service, chanting, hearing, worshiping, offering respect, etc., as
described in the last verse of the Ninth Chapter. That process should
be followed.
Naturally, when one is adapted to the spiritual way of life, he will
not want to mix with materialistic men. That would go against his
grain. One may test himself by seeing how far he is inclined to live in
a solitary place without unwanted association. Naturally a devotee has
no taste for unnecessary sporting or cinema-going or enjoying some
social function, because he understands that these are simply a waste
of time. There are many research scholars and philosophers who study
sex life or some other subject, but according to Bhagavad-gita, such
research work and philosophical speculation have no value. That is more
or less nonsensical. According to Bhagavad-gita, one should make
research, by philosophical discretion into the nature of the soul. One
should make research to understand with what the self is concerned.
That is recommended here.
As far as self-realization is concerned, it is clearly stated here that
bhakti-yoga is especially practical. As soon as there is a question of
devotion, one must consider the relationship between the Supersoul and
the individual soul. The individual soul and the Supersoul cannot be
one, at least not in the bhakti conception, the devotional conception
of life. This service of the individual soul to the Supreme Soul is
eternal, nityam, as it is clearly stated. So bhakti or devotional
service is eternal. One should be established in that philosophical
conviction, otherwise it is only a waste of time, ignorance.
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11) this is explained; vadanti tat
tattva-vidas tattvam yaj jnanam advayam. "Those who are actually
knowers of the Absolute Truth know that the Self is realized in three
different phases, as Brahman, Paramatma and Bhagavan." Bhagavan is the
last word in the realization of the Absolute Truth; therefore one
should reach up to that platform of understanding the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and thus engage in the devotional service of the
Lord. That is perfection of knowledge.
Beginning from practicing humility up to the point of realization of
the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Personality of Godhead, this process is
just like a staircase beginning from the ground floor up to the top
floor. Now on this staircase there are so many people who have reached
the first floor, or the second or the third floor, etc., but unless one
reaches the top floor, which is the understanding of Krsna, he is at a
lower stage of knowledge. If anyone wants to compete with God and at
the same time make advancement in spiritual knowledge, he will be
frustrated. It is clearly stated that without humility understanding is
harmful. To think oneself God is most puffed up. Although the living
entity is always being kicked by the stringent laws of material nature,
still he thinks, "I am God" because of ignorance. One should be humble
and know that he is subordinate to the Supreme Lord. Due to rebellion
against the Supreme Lord, one becomes subordinate to material nature.
One must know and be convinced of this truth.
TEXT 13
jneyam yat tat pravaksyami
yaj jnatvamrtam asnute
anadi mat-param brahma
na sat tan nasad ucyate
SYNONYMS
jneyam--knowable; yat--that; tat--which; pravaksyami--I shall now
explain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; amrtam--nectar; asnute--taste;
anadi--beginningless; mat-param--subordinate to Me; brahma--spirit; na-
-neither; sat--cause; tat--that; na--nor; asat--effect; ucyate--is
called.
TRANSLATION
I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the
eternal. This is beginningless, and it is subordinate to Me. It is
called Brahman, the spirit, and it lies beyond the cause and effect of
this material world.
PURPORT
The Lord has explained the field of activities and the knower of the
field. He has also explained the process of knowing the knower of the
field of activities. Now He is explaining the knowable, both the soul
and the Supersoul respectively. By knowledge of the knower, both the
soul and the Supersoul, one can relish the nectar of life. As explained
in the Second Chapter, the living entity is eternal. This is also
confirmed here. There is no specific date at which the jiva was born.
Nor can anyone trace out the history of the jivatma's manifestation
from the Supreme Lord. Therefore it is beginningless. The Vedic
literature confirms this: na jayate mriyate va vipascit (Katha Upanisad
1.2.18). The knower of the body is never born and never dies, and he is
full of knowledge.
The Supreme Lord is also stated in the Vedic literature (Svetasvatara
Upanisad 6.16) as pradhana-ksetrajna-patir gunesah. The Supreme Lord as
the Supersoul is the chief knower of the body and He is the master of
the three modes of material nature. In the smrti it is said: dasa-bhuto
harer eva nanyasvaiva kadacana. The living entities are eternally in
the service of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed by Lord
Caitanya in His teachings; therefore the description of Brahman
mentioned in this verse is in relation to the individual soul, and when
the word Brahman is applied to the living entity, it is to be
understood that he is vijnana-brahma as opposed to ananda-brahma.
Ananda-brahma is the Supreme Brahman Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 14
sarvatah pani-padam tat
sarvato 'ksi-siro-mukham
sarvatah srutimal loke
sarvam avrtya tisthati
SYNONYMS
sarvatah--everywhere; pani--hands; padam--legs; tat--that; sarvatah--
everywhere; 
aksi--eyes; 
sirah--head; 
mukham--face; 
sarvatah--
everywhere; sruti-mat--hearing; loke--in the world; sarvam--everything;
avrtya--covering; tisthati--exists.
TRANSLATION
Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes and faces, and He hears
everything. In this way the Supersoul exists.
PURPORT
As the sun exists diffusing its unlimited rays, so does the Supersoul,
or Supreme Personality of Godhead. He exists in His all-pervading form,
and in Him exist all the individual living entities, beginning from the
first great teacher, Brahma, down to the small ants. There are
unlimited heads, legs, hands and eyes, and unlimited living entities.
All are existing in and on the Supersoul. Therefore the Supersoul is
all-pervading. The individual soul, however, cannot say that he has his
hands, legs and eyes everywhere. That is not possible. If he thinks
that although under ignorance he is not conscious that his hands and
legs are diffused all over, but when he attains to proper knowledge he
will come to that stage, his thinking is contradictory. This means that
the individual soul, having become conditioned by material nature, is
not supreme. The Supreme is different from the individual soul. The
Supreme Lord can extend His hand without limit; the individual soul
cannot. In Bhagavad-gita the Lord says that if anyone offers Him a
flower, or a fruit, or a little water, He accepts. If the Lord is a far
distance away, how can He accept things? This is the omnipotence of the
Lord: even though He is situated in His own abode, far, far away from
earth, He can extend His hand to accept what anyone offers. That is His
potency. In the Brahma-samhita (5.37) it is stated, goloka eva
nivasaty: although He is always engaged in pastimes in His
transcendental planet, He is all-pervading. The individual soul cannot
claim that he is all-pervading. Therefore this verse describes the
Supreme Soul, the Personality of Godhead, not the individual soul.
TEXT 15
sarvendriya-gunabhasam
sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktam sarva-bhrc caiva
nirgunam guna-bhoktr ca
SYNONYMS
sarva--all; indriya--senses; guna--qualities; abhasam--original source;
sarva--all; indriya--senses; vivarjitam--being without; asaktam--
without attachment; sarva-bhrt--maintainer of everyone; ca--also; eva--
certainly; nirgunam--without material qualities; guna-bhoktr--
simultaneously master of the gunas; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without
senses. He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living
beings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is
the master of all modes of material nature.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord, although the source of all the senses of the living
entities, doesn't have material senses like they have. Actually, the
individual souls have spiritual senses, but in conditioned life they
are covered with the material elements, and therefore the sense
activities are exhibited through matter. The Supreme Lord's senses are
not so covered. His senses are transcendental and are therefore called
nirguna. Guna means the material modes, but His senses are without
material covering. It should be understood that His senses are not
exactly like ours. Although He is the source of all our sensual
activities, He has His transcendental senses which are uncontaminated.
This is very nicely explained in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.19) in
the verse apani-pado javano grahita. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
has no hands which are materially contaminated, but He has His hands
and accepts whatever sacrifice is offered to Him. That is the
distinction between the conditioned soul and the Supersoul. He has no
material eyes, but He has eyes--otherwise how could He see? He sees
everything, past, present and future. He lives within the heart of the
living being, and He knows what we have done in the past, what we are
doing now, and what is awaiting us in the future. This is also
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita: He knows everything, but no one knows Him.
It is said that the Supreme Lord has no legs like us, but He can travel
throughout space because He has spiritual legs. In other words, the
Lord is not impersonal; He has His eyes, legs, hands and everything
else, and because we are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord we also
have these things. But His hands, legs, eyes and senses are not
contaminated by material nature.
Bhagavad-gita also confirms that when the Lord appears He appears as He
is by His internal potency. He is not contaminated by the material
energy because He is the Lord of material energy. In the Vedic
literature we find that His whole embodiment is spiritual. He has His
eternal form called sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. He is full of all opulence.
He is the proprietor of all wealth and the owner of all energy. He is
the most intelligent and is full of knowledge. These are some of the
symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is maintainer of all
living entities and the witness of all activity. As far as we can
understand from Vedic literature, the Supreme Lord is always
transcendental. Although we do not see His head, face, hands, or legs,
He has them, and when we are elevated to the transcendental situation
then we can see the Lord's form. Due to materially contaminated senses,
we cannot see His form. Therefore the impersonalists who are still
materially affected cannot understand the Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 16
bahir antas ca bhutanam
acaram caram eva ca
suksmatvat tad avijneyam
dura-stham cantike ca tat
SYNONYMS
bahih--outside; antah--inside; ca--also; bhutanam--of all living
entities; acaram--not moving; caram--moving; eva--also; ca--and;
suksmatvat--on account of being subtle; tat--that; avijneyam--
unknowable; dura-stham--far away; ca--also; antike--near; ca--and; tat-
-that.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the moving
and nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material senses to see or
to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.
PURPORT
In Vedic literature we understand that Narayana, the Supreme Person, is
residing both outside and inside of every living entity. He is present
in both the spiritual and material worlds. Although He is far, far
away, still He is near to us. These are the statements of Vedic
literature. Asino duram vrajati sayano yati sarvatah (Katha Upanisad
1.2.21). And because He is always engaged in transcendental bliss, we
cannot understand how He is enjoying His full opulence. We cannot see
or understand with these material senses. Therefore in the Vedic
language it is said that to understand Him our material mind and senses
cannot act. But one who has purified his mind and senses by practicing
Krsna consciousness in devotional service can see Him constantly. It is
confirmed in Brahma-samhita that the devotee who has developed love for
the Supreme God can see Him always, without cessation. And it is
confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (11.54) that He can be seen and understood
only by devotional service. Bhaktya tv ananyaya sakyah.
TEXT 17
avibhaktam ca bhutesu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
bhuta-bhartr ca taj jneyam
grasisnu prabhavisnu ca
SYNONYMS
avibhaktam--without division; ca--also; bhutesu--in every living being;
vibhaktam--divided; iva--as if; ca--also; sthitam--situated; bhuta-
bhartr--maintainer of all living entities; ca--also; tat--that; jneyam-
-to be understood; grasisnu--devours; prabhavisnu--develops; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
Although the Supersoul appears to be divided, He is never divided. He
is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living
entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.
PURPORT
The Lord is situated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul. Does this
mean that He has become divided? No. Actually, He is one. The example
is given of the sun: The sun, at the meridian, is situated in its
place. But if one goes for five thousand miles in all directions and
asks, "Where is the sun?" everyone will say that it is shining on his
head. In the Vedic literature this example is given to show that
although He is undivided, He is situated as if divided. Also it is said
in Vedic literature that one Visnu is present everywhere by His
omnipotence, just as the sun appears in many places to many persons.
And the Supreme Lord, although the maintainer of every living entity,
devours everything at the time of annihilation. This was confirmed in
the Eleventh Chapter when the Lord said that He had come to devour all
the warriors assembled at Kuruksetra. He also mentioned that in the
form of time He devours also. He is the annihilator, the killer of all.
When there is creation, He develops all from their original state, and
at the time of annihilation He devours them. The Vedic hymns confirm
the fact that He is the origin of all living entities and the rest of
all. After creation, everything rests in His omnipotence, and after
annihilation everything again returns to rest in Him. These are the
confirmations of Vedic hymns. Yato va imani bhutani jayante yena jatani
jivanti yat prayanty abhisam-visanti tad brahma tad vijijnasasva
(Taittiriya Upanisad 3.1).
TEXT 18
jyotisam api taj jyotis
tamasah param ucyate
jnanam jneyam jnana-gamyam
hrdi sarvasya visthitam
SYNONYMS
jyotisam--in all luminous objects; api--also; tat--that; jyotih--source
of light; tamasah--of the darkness; param--beyond; ucyate--is said;
jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--to be known; jnana-gamyam--to be approached
by knowledge; hrdi--in the heart; sarvasya--of everyone; visthitam--
situated.
TRANSLATION
He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the
darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the
object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in
everyone's heart.
PURPORT
The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the source of
light in all luminous objects like the sun, moon and stars. In the
Vedic literature we find that in the spiritual kingdom there is no need
of sun or moon because the effulgence of the Supreme Lord is there. In
the material world that brahmajyoti, the Lord's spiritual effulgence,
is covered by mahat-tattva, the material elements; therefore in this
material world we require the assistance of sun, moon, electricity,
etc., for light. But in the spiritual world there is no need of such
things. It is clearly stated in the Vedic literature that because of
His luminous effulgence, everything is illuminated. It is clear,
therefore, that His situation is not in the material world. He is
situated in the spiritual world, which is far, far away in the
spiritual sky. That is also confirmed in the Vedic literature. Aditya-
varnam tamasah parastat (Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8). He is just like
the sun, eternally luminous, but He is far, far beyond the darkness of
this material world. His knowledge is transcendental. The Vedic
literature confirms that Brahman is concentrated transcendental
knowledge. To one who is anxious to be transferred to that spiritual
world, knowledge is given by the Supreme Lord who is situated in
everyone's heart.
One Vedic mantra (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.18) says, tam ha devam atma-
buddhi-prakasam mumuksur vai saranam aham prapadye. One must surrender
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead if he at all wants liberation.
As far as the goal of ultimate knowledge is concerned, it is also
confirmed in Vedic literature: tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti. "Only by
knowing Him can one surpass the boundary of birth and death."
(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8) He is situated in everyone's heart as the
supreme controller. The Supreme has legs and hands distributed
everywhere, and this cannot be said of the individual soul. Therefore
that there are two knowers of the field of activity, the individual
soul and the Supersoul, must be admitted. One's hands and legs are
distributed locally, but Krsna's hands and legs are distributed
everywhere. This is confirmed in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.17):
sarvasya prabhum isanam sarvasya saranam brhat. That Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Supersoul, is the prabhu or master, of all
living entities; therefore He is the ultimate shelter of all living
entities. So there is no denying the fact that the Supreme Supersoul
and the individual soul are always different.
TEXT 19
iti ksetram tatha jnanam
jneyam coktam samasatah
mad-bhakta etad vijnaya
mad-bhavayopapadyate
SYNONYMS
iti--thus; ksetram--the field of activities (the body); tatha--also;
jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--the knowable; ca--also; uktam--described;
samasatah--in summary; mat-bhaktah--My devotee; etat--all this;
vijnaya--after understanding; mat-bhavaya--My nature; upapadyate--
attains.
TRANSLATION
Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable
have been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understand
this thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.
PURPORT
The Lord has described in summary the body, knowledge and the knowable.
This knowledge is of three things: the knower, the knowable and the
process of knowing. Combined, these are called vijnana, or the science
of knowledge. Perfect knowledge can be understood by the unalloyed
devotees of the Lord directly. Others are unable to understand. The
monists say that at the ultimate stage these three items become one,
but the devotees do not accept this. Knowledge and development of
knowledge mean understanding oneself in Krsna consciousness. We are
being led by material consciousness, but as soon as we transfer all
consciousness to Krsna's activities and realize that Krsna is
everything, then we attain real knowledge. In other words, knowledge is
nothing but the preliminary stage of understanding devotional service
perfectly.
TEXT 20
prakrtim purusam caiva
viddhy anadi ubhav api
vikarams ca gunams caiva
viddhi prakrti-sambhavan
SYNONYMS
prakrtim--material nature; purusam--living entities; ca--also; eva--
certainly; viddhi--must know; anadi--without beginning; ubhau--both;
api--also; vikaran--transformations; ca--also; gunan--three modes of
nature; ca--also; eva--certainly; viddhi--know; prakrti--material
nature; sambhavan--produced of.
TRANSLATION
Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be
beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are
products of material nature.
PURPORT
By this knowledge, the body, the field of activities and the knowers of
the body (both the individual soul and the Supersoul) can be known. The
body is the field of activity and is composed of material nature. It is
the individual soul which is embodied. Enjoying the activities of the
body is the purusa, or the living entity. He is one knower, and the
other is the Supersoul. Of course, it is to be understood that both the
Supersoul and the individual entity are different manifestations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living entity is in the category of
His energy, and the Supersoul is in the category of His personal
expansion.
Both material nature and the living entity are eternal. That is to say
that they existed before the creation. The material manifestation is
from the energy of the Supreme Lord and so also are the living
entities, but they are of the superior energy. Both the living entities
and material nature existed before this cosmos was manifested. Material
nature was absorbed in the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Maha-Visnu,
and when it was required, it was manifested by the agency of mahat-
tattva. Similarly, the living entities are also in Him, and because
they are conditioned, they are averse to serving the Supreme Lord. Thus
they are not allowed to enter into the spiritual sky. After the winding
up of material nature, these living entities are again given a chance
to act in the material world and prepare themselves to enter into the
spiritual world. That is the mystery of this material creation.
Actually the living entity is originally the spiritual part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord, but due to his rebellious nature, he is
conditioned within material nature. It really does not matter how these
living entities or superior entities of the Supreme Lord have come in
contact with material nature. The Supreme Personality of Godhead knows,
however, how and why this actually took place. In the scriptures the
Lord says that those attracted by this material nature are undergoing a
hard struggle for existence. But we should know it with certainty from
the descriptions of these few verses that all the transformations and
influences of material nature by the three modes are also productions
of material nature. All transformations and variety in respect to
living entities are due to the body. As far as spirit is concerned,
living entities are all the same.
TEXT 21
karya-karana-kartrtve
hetuh prakrtir ucyate
purusah sukha-duhkhanam
bhoktrtve hetur ucyate
SYNONYMS
karya--effect; karana--cause; kartrtve--in the matter of creation;
hetuh--instrument; prakrtih--material nature; ucyate--is said to be;
purusah--the living entity; sukha--of happiness; duhkhanam--and
distress; bhoktrtve--in enjoyment; hetuh--the instrument; ucyate--is
said to be.
TRANSLATION
Nature is said to be the cause of all material activities and effects,
whereas the living entity is the cause of the various sufferings and
enjoyments in this world.
PURPORT
The different manifestations of body and senses among the living
entities are due to material nature. There are 8,400,000 different
species of life, and these varieties are the creation of the material
nature. They arise from the different sensual pleasures of the living
entity, who thus desires to live in this body or that. When he is put
into different bodies, he enjoys different kinds of happiness and
distress. His material happiness and distress are due to his body, and
not to himself as he is. In his original state there is no doubt of
enjoyment; therefore that is his real state. Because of the desire to
lord it over material nature, he is in the material world. In the
spiritual world there is no such thing. The spiritual world is pure,
but in the material world everyone is struggling hard to acquire
victims who present different pleasures to the body. It might be more
clear to state that this body is the effect of the senses. The senses
are instruments for gratifying desire. Now, the sum total--body and
instrument senses--are offered by material nature and, as will be clear
in the next verse, the living entity is blessed or damned with
circumstances according to his past desire and activity. According to
one's desires and activities, material nature places one in various
residential quarters. The being himself is the cause of his attaining
such residential quarters and his attendant enjoyment or suffering.
Once placed in some particular kind of body, he comes under the control
of nature because the body, being matter, acts according to the laws of
nature. At that time, the living entity has no power to change that
law. Suppose an entity is put into the body of a dog. As soon as he is
put into the body of a dog, he must act like a dog. He cannot act
otherwise. And if the living entity is put into the body of a hog, then
he is forced to eat stool and act like a hog. Similarly, if the living
entity is put into the body of a demigod, he must act according to his
body. This is the law of nature. But in all circumstances, the
Supersoul is with the individual soul. That is explained in the Vedas
(Mundaka Upanisad 3.1.1) as follows: dva suparna sayuja sakhayah. The
Supreme Lord is so kind upon the living entity that He always
accompanies the individual soul and in all circumstances is present as
the Supersoul, or Paramatma.
TEXT 22
purusah prakrti-stho hi
bhunkte prakrti-jan gunan
karanam guna-sango 'sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
SYNONYMS
purusah--the living entity; prakrti-sthah--being situated in the
material energy; hi--certainly; bhunkte--enjoys; prakrti-jan--produced
by the material nature; gunan--modes of nature; karanam--cause; guna-
sangah--association with the modes of nature; asya--of the living
entity; sat-asat--good and bad; yoni--species of life; janmasu--birth.
TRANSLATION
The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life,
enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with
that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil amongst various
species.
PURPORT
This verse is very important for an understanding of how the living
entities transmigrate from one body to another. It is explained in the
Second Chapter that the living entity is transmigrating from one body
to another just as one changes dress. This change of dress is due to
his attachment to material existence. As long as he is captivated by
this false manifestation, he has to continue transmigrating from one
body to another. Due to his desire to lord it over material nature, he
is put into such undesirable circumstances. Under the influence of
material desire, the entity is born sometimes as a demigod, sometimes
as a man, sometimes as a beast, as a bird, as a worm, as an aquatic, as
a saintly man, as a bug. This is going on. And in all cases the living
entity thinks himself to be the master of his circumstances, yet he is
under the influence of material nature.
How he is put into such different bodies is explained here. It is due
to association with the different modes of nature. One has to rise,
therefore, above the three material modes and become situated in the
transcendental position. That is called Krsna consciousness. Unless one
is situated in Krsna consciousness, his material consciousness will
oblige him to transfer from one body to another because he has material
desires since time immemorial. But he has to change that conception.
That change can be effected only by hearing from authoritative sources.
The best example is here: Arjuna is hearing the science of God from
Krsna. The living entity, if he submits to this hearing process, will
lose his long-cherished desire to dominate material nature, and
gradually and proportionately, as he reduces his long desire to
dominate, he comes to enjoy spiritual happiness. In a Vedic mantra it
is said that as he becomes learned in association with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he proportionately relishes his eternal
blissful life.
TEXT 23
upadrastanumanta ca
bharta bhokta mahesvarah
paramatmeti capy ukto
dehe 'smin purusah parah
SYNONYMS
upadrasta--overseer; anumanta--permitter; ca--also; bharta--master;
bhokta--supreme enjoyer; maha-isvarah--the Supreme Lord; parama-atma--
Supersoul; iti--also; ca--and; api uktah--is said; dehe--in this body;
asmin--this; purusah--enjoyer; parah--transcendental.
TRANSLATION
Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer who is the
Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter,
and who is known as the Supersoul.
PURPORT
It is stated here that the Supersoul, who is always with the individual
soul, is the representation of the Supreme Lord. He is not an ordinary
living entity. Because the monist philosophers take the knower of the
body to be one, they think that there is no difference between the
Supersoul and the individual soul. To clarify this, the Lord says that
He is the representation of Paramatma in every body. He is different
from the individual soul; He is para, transcendental. The individual
soul enjoys the activities of a particular field, but the Supersoul is
present not as finite enjoyer nor as one taking part in bodily
activities, but as the witness, overseer, permitter and supreme
enjoyer. His name is Paramatma, not atma, and He is transcendental. It
is distinctly clear that the atma and Paramatma are different. The
Supersoul, the Paramatma, has legs and hands everywhere, but the
individual soul does not. And because He is the Supreme Lord, He is
present within to sanction the individual soul's desiring material
enjoyment. Without the sanction of the Supreme Soul, the individual
soul cannot do anything. The individual is bhukta, or the sustained,
and the Lord is bhokta, or the maintainer. There are innumerable living
entities, and He is staying in them as a friend.
The fact is that individual living entities are eternally part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord, and both of them are very intimately
related as friends. But the living entity has the tendency to reject
the sanction of the Supreme Lord and act independently in an attempt to
dominate nature, and because he has this tendency, he is called the
marginal energy of the Supreme Lord. The living entity can be situated
either in the material energy or the spiritual energy. As long as he is
conditioned by the material energy, the Supreme Lord, as his friend,
the Supersoul, stays with him just to get him to return to the
spiritual energy. The Lord is always eager to take him back to the
spiritual energy, but due to his minute independence, the individual
entity is continually rejecting the association of spiritual light.
This misuse of independence is the cause of his material strife in the
conditioned nature. The Lord, therefore, is always giving instruction
from within and from without. From without He gives instructions as
stated in Bhagavad-gita, and from within He tries to convince him that
his activities in the material field are not conducive to real
happiness. "Just give it up and turn your face toward Me. Then you will
be happy," He says. Thus the intelligent person who places his faith in
the Paramatma or the Supreme Personality of Godhead begins to advance
toward a blissful eternal life of knowledge.
TEXT 24
ya evam vetti purusam
prakrtim ca gunaih saha
sarvatha vartamano 'pi
na sa bhuyo 'bhijayate
SYNONYMS
yah--anyone; evam--thus; vetti--understands; purusam--the living
entity; prakrtim--material nature; ca--and; gunaih--modes of material
nature; saha--with; sarvatha--by all means; vartamanah--situated; api--
in spite of; na--never; sah--he; bhuyah--again; abhijayate--takes his
birth.
TRANSLATION
One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the
living entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure to
attain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of his
present position.
PURPORT
Clear understanding of material nature, the Supersoul, the individual
soul and their interrelation makes one eligible to become liberated and
turn to the spiritual atmosphere without being forced to return to this
material nature. This is the result of knowledge. The purpose of
knowledge is to understand distinctly that the living entity has by
chance fallen into this material existence. By his personal endeavor in
association with authorities, saintly persons and a spiritual master,
he has to understand his position and then revert to spiritual
consciousness or Krsna consciousness by understanding Bhagavad-gita as
it is explained by the Personality of Godhead. Then it is certain that
he will never come again into this material existence; he will be
transferred into the spiritual world for a blissful eternal life of
knowledge.
TEXT 25
dhyanenatmani pasyanti
kecid atmanam atmana
anye sankhyena yogena
karma-yogena capare
SYNONYMS
dhyanena--by meditation; atmani--self; pasyanti--see; kecit--one;
atmanam--Supersoul; atmana--by the mind; anye--others; sankhyena--by
philosophical discussion; yogena--by the yoga system; karma-yogena--by
activities without fruitive desire; ca--also; apare--others.
TRANSLATION
That Supersoul is perceived by some through meditation, by some through
the cultivation of knowledge, and by others through working without
fruitive desire.
PURPORT
The Lord informs Arjuna that the conditioned souls can be divided into
two classes as far as man's search for self-realization is concerned.
Those who are atheists, agnostics and skeptics are beyond the sense of
spiritual understanding. But there are others who are faithful in their
understanding of spiritual life, and they are called workers who have
renounced fruitive results. Those who always try to establish the
doctrine of monism are also counted amongst the atheists and agnostics.
In other words, only the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
are really capable of spiritual understanding because they understand
that beyond this material nature there is the spiritual world and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is expanded as the Paramatma, the
Supersoul in everyone, the all-pervading Godhead. Of course there are
those who try to understand the Supreme Absolute Truth by cultivation
of knowledge, and they can be counted in the second class. The
atheistic philosophers analyze this material world into twenty-four
elements, and they place the individual soul as the twenty-fifth item.
When they are able to understand the nature of the individual soul to
be transcendental to the material elements, they are able to understand
also that above the individual soul there is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is the twenty-sixth element. Thus gradually they also come
to the standard of devotional service in Krsna consciousness. Those who
work without fruitive results are also perfect in their attitude. They
are given a chance to advance to the platform of devotional service in
Krsna consciousness. Here it is stated that there are some people who
are pure in consciousness and who try to find out the Supersoul by
meditation, and when they discover the Supersoul within themselves,
they become transcendentally situated. Similarly, there are others who
also try to understand the Supreme Soul by cultivation of knowledge,
and there are others who cultivate the hatha-yoga system and who try to
satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead by childish activities.
TEXT 26
anye tv evam ajanantah
srutvanyebhya upasate
te 'pi catitaranty eva
mrtyum sruti-parayanah
SYNONYMS
anye--others; tu--but; evam--thus; ajanantah--without spiritual
knowledge; srutva--by hearing; anyebhyah--from others; upasate--begin
to worship; te--they; api--also; ca--and; atitaranti--transcend; eva--
certainly; mrtyum--the path of death; sruti-parayanah--inclined to the
process of hearing.
TRANSLATION
Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual
knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him
from others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they
also transcend the path of birth and death.
PURPORT
This verse is particularly applicable to modern society because in
modern society there is practically no education in spiritual matters.
Some of the people may appear to be atheistic or agnostic or
philosophical, but actually there is no knowledge of philosophy. As for
the common man, if he is a good soul, then there is a chance for
advancement by hearing. This hearing process is very important. Lord
Caitanya, who preached Krsna consciousness in the modern world, gave
great stress to hearing because if the common man simply hears from
authoritative sources, he can progress, especially, according to Lord
Caitanya, if he hears the transcendental vibration Hare Krsna, Hare
Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare
Hare. It is stated, therefore, that all men should take advantage of
hearing from realized souls and gradually become able to understand
everything. The worship of the Supreme Lord will then undoubtedly take
place. Lord Caitanya has said that in this age no one needs to change
his position, but one should give up the endeavor to understand the
Absolute Truth by speculative reasoning. One should learn to become the
servant of those who are in knowledge of the Supreme Lord. If one is
fortunate enough to take shelter of a pure devotee, hear from him about
self-realization and follow in his footsteps, he will be gradually
elevated to the position of a pure devotee. In this verse particularly,
the process of hearing is strongly recommended, and this is very
appropriate. Although the common man is often not as capable as so-
called philosophers, faithful hearing from an authoritative person will
help one transcend this material existence and go back to Godhead, back
to home.
TEXT 27
yavat sanjayate kincit
sattvam sthavara-jangamam
ksetra-ksetrajna-samyogat
tad viddhi bharatarsabha
SYNONYMS
yavat--whatever; sanjayate--takes place; kincit--anything; sattvam--
existence; sthavara--not moving; jangamam--moving; ksetra--the body;
ksetra-jna--knower of the body; samyogat--union between; tat viddhi--
you must know it; bharata-rsabha--O chief of the Bharatas.
TRANSLATION
O chief of the Bharatas, whatever you see in existence, both moving and
unmoving, is only the combination of the field of activities and the
knower of the field.
PURPORT
Both material nature and the living entity, which were existing before
the creation of the cosmos, are explained in this verse. Whatever is
created is but a combination of the living entity and material nature.
There are many manifestations like trees, mountains and hills, which
are not moving, and there are many existences which are moving, and all
of them are but combinations of material nature and superior nature,
the living entity. Without the touch of superior nature, the living
entity, nothing can grow. Therefore the relationship between matter and
nature is eternally going on, and this combination is effected by the
Supreme Lord; therefore He is the controller of both the superior and
inferior natures. The material nature is created by Him, and the
superior nature is placed in this material nature, and thus all these
activities and manifestations take place.
TEXT 28
samam sarvesu bhutesu
tisthantam paramesvaram
vinasyatsv avinasyantam
yah pasyati sa pasyati
SYNONYMS
samam--equally; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tisthan-tam-
-residing; 
parama-isvaram--the 
Supersoul; 
vinasyatsu--in 
the
destructible; avinasyantam--not destroyed; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;
sah--he; pasyati--actually sees.
TRANSLATION
One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all
bodies, and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul is
ever destroyed, actually sees.
PURPORT
Anyone who can see three things--the body, the proprietor of the body,
or individual soul, and the friend of the individual soul, combined
together by good association--is actually in knowledge. Those who are
not associated with the soul's friend are ignorant; they simply see the
body, and when the body is destroyed they think that everything is
finished, but actually it is not so. After the destruction of the body,
both the soul and the Supersoul exist, and they go on eternally in many
various moving and unmoving forms. The Sanskrit word paramesvara is
sometimes translated as "the individual soul" because the soul is the
master of the body, and after the destruction of the body he transfers
to another form. In that way he is master. But there are others who
interpret this paramesvara to be the Supersoul. In either case, both
the Supersoul and the individual soul continue. They are not destroyed.
One who can see in this way can actually see what is happening.
TEXT 29
samam pasyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam isvaram
na hinasty atmanatmanam
tato yati param gatim
SYNONYMS
samam--equally; pasyan--seeing; hi--certainly; sarvatra--everywhere;
samavasthitam--equally situated; isvaram--Supersoul; na--does not;
hinasti--degrade; atmana--by the mind; atmanam--the soul; tatah yati--
then reaches; param--the transcendental; gatim--destination.
TRANSLATION
One who sees the Supersoul in every living being and equal everywhere
does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the
transcendental destination.
PURPORT
The living entity, by accepting his material existence as just so much
suffering, can become situated in his spiritual existence. If one
understands that the Supreme is situated in His Paramatma manifestation
everywhere, that is, if one can see the presence of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in every living thing, he does not degrade
himself, and he therefore gradually advances to the spiritual world.
The mind is generally addicted to self-centered processes; but when the
mind turns to the Supersoul, one becomes advanced in spiritual
understanding.
TEXT 30
prakrtyaiva ca karmani
kriyamanani sarvasah
yah pasyati tathatmanam
akartaram sa pasyati
SYNONYMS
prakrtya--by material nature; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--
activities; kriyamanani--engaged in performing; sarvasah--in all
respects; yah--anyone who; pasyati--sees; tatha--also; atmanam--
himself; akartaram--non-doer; sah--he; pasyati--sees perfectly.
TRANSLATION
One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is
created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing,
actually sees.
PURPORT
This body is made by material nature under the direction of the
Supersoul, and whatever activities are going on in respect to one's
body are not his doing. Whatever one is supposed to do, either for
happiness or for distress, one is forced to do because of the bodily
constitution. The self, however, is outside all these bodily
activities. This body is given according to one's past desires. To
fulfill desires, one is given the body, with which he acts accordingly.
Practically speaking, the body is a machine, designed by the Supreme
Lord, to fulfill desires. Because of desires, one is put into difficult
circumstances to suffer or to enjoy. This transcendental vision of the
living entity, when developed, makes one separate from bodily
activities. One who has such a vision is an actual seer.
TEXT 31
yada bhuta-prthag-bhavam
eka-stham anupasyati
tata eva ca vistaram
brahma sampadyate tada
SYNONYMS
yada--when; 
bhuta--living 
entities; 
prthak-bhavam--separated
identities; eka-stham--situated in one; anupasyati--tries to see
through authority; tatah eva--thereafter; ca--also; vistaram--expanded;
brahma--the Absolute; sampadyate--attains; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATION
When a sensible man ceases to see different identities, which are due
to different material bodies, he attains to the Brahman conception.
Thus he sees that beings are expanded everywhere.
PURPORT
When one can see that the various bodies of living entities arise due
to the different desires of the individual soul and do not actually
belong to the soul itself, one actually sees. In the material
conception of life, we find someone a demigod, someone a human being, a
dog, a cat, etc. This is material vision, not actual vision. This
material differentiation is due to a material conception of life. After
the destruction of the material body, the spirit soul is one. The
spirit soul, due to contact with material nature, gets different types
of bodies. When one can see this, he attains spiritual vision; thus
being freed from differentiations like man, animal, big, low, etc., one
becomes purified in his consciousness and able to develop Krsna
consciousness in his spiritual identity. How he then sees things will
be explained in the next verse.
TEXT 32
anaditvan nirgunatvat
paramatmayam avyayah
sarira-stho 'pi kaunteya
na karoti na lipyate
SYNONYMS
anaditvat--due to eternity; nirgunatvat--due to transcendental; parama-
-beyond material nature; 
atma--spirit; 
ayam--this; 
avyayah--
inexhaustible; sarira-sthah api--though dwelling in the body; kaunteya-
-O son of Kunti; na karoti--never does anything; na lipyate--nor is he
entangled.
TRANSLATION
Those with the vision of eternity can see that the soul is
transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite
contact with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither does
anything nor is entangled.
PURPORT
A living entity appears to be born because of the birth of the material
body, but actually the living entity is eternal; he is not born, and in
spite of his being situated in a material body, he is transcendental
and eternal. Thus he cannot be destroyed. By nature he is full of
bliss. He does not engage himself in any material activities; therefore
the activities performed due to his contact with material bodies do not
entangle him.
TEXT 33
yatha sarva-gatam sauksmyad
akasam nopalipyate
sarvatravasthito dehe
tathatma nopalipyate
SYNONYMS
yatha--as; sarva-gatam--all-pervading; sauksmyat--due to being subtle;
akasam--the sky; na--never; upalipyate--mixes; sarvatra--everywhere;
avasthitah--situated; dehe--in the body; tatha--such; atma--the self;
na--never; upalipyate--mixes.
TRANSLATION
The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although
it is all-pervading. Similarly, the soul, situated in Brahman vision,
does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.
PURPORT
The air enters into water, mud, stool and whatever else is there; still
it does not mix with anything. Similarly, the living entity, even
though situated in varieties of bodies, is aloof from them due to his
subtle nature. Therefore it is impossible to see with the material eyes
how the living entity is in contact with this body and how he is out of
it after the destruction of the body. No one in science can ascertain
this.
TEXT 34
yatha prakasayaty ekah
krtsnam lokam imam ravih
ksetram ksetri tatha krtsnam
prakasayati bharata
SYNONYMS
yatha--as; prakasayati--illuminates; ekah--one; krtsnam--the whole;
lokam--universe; imam--this; ravih--the sun; ksetram--this body;
ksetri--the soul; tatha--similarly; krtsnam--all; prakasayati--
illuminates; bharata--O son of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
O son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so
does the living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire body
by consciousness.
PURPORT
There are various theories regarding consciousness. Here in Bhagavad-
gita the example of the sun and the sunshine is given. As the sun is
situated in one place, but is illuminating the whole universe, so a
small particle of spirit soul, although situated in the heart of this
body, is illuminating the whole body by consciousness. Thus
consciousness is the proof of the presence of the soul, as sunshine or
light is the proof of the presence of the sun. When the soul is present
in the body, there is consciousness all over the body, and as soon as
the soul has passed from the body, there is no more consciousness. This
can be easily understood by any intelligent man. Therefore
consciousness is not a production of the combinations of matter. It is
the symptom of the living entity. The consciousness of the living
entity, although qualitatively one with the supreme consciousness, is
not supreme because the consciousness of one particular body does not
share that of another body. But the Supersoul, which is situated in all
bodies as the friend of the individual soul, is conscious of all
bodies. That is the difference between supreme consciousness and
individual consciousness.
TEXT 35
ksetra-ksetrajnayor evam
antaram jnana-caksusa
bhuta-prakrti-moksam ca
ye vidur yanti te param
SYNONYMS
ksetra--body; ksetra-jnayoh--of the proprietor of the body; evam--that;
antaram--difference; jnana-caksusa--by vision of knowledge; bhuta--
living entity; prakrti--material nature; moksam--liberation; ca--also;
ye--one who; viduh--knows; yanti--approaches; te--they; param--Supreme.
TRANSLATION
One who knowingly sees this difference between the body and the owner
of the body and can understand the process of liberation from this
bondage, also attains to the supreme goal.
PURPORT
The purport of this Thirteenth Chapter is that one should know the
distinction between the body, the owner of the body, and the Supersoul.
A faithful person should at first have some good association to hear of
God and thus gradually become enlightened. If one accepts a spiritual
master, he can learn to distinguish between matter and spirit, and that
becomes the steppingstone for further spiritual realization. A
spiritual master teaches his students to get free from the material
concept of life by various instructions. For instance, in Bhagavad-gita
we find Krsna instructing Arjuna to free him from materialistic
considerations.
One can understand that this body is matter; it can be analyzed with
its twenty-four elements. That is the gross manifestation. And the
subtle manifestation is the mind and psychological effects. And the
symptoms of life are the interaction of these features. But over and
above this, there is the soul, and there is also the Supersoul. The
soul and the Supersoul are two. This material world is working by the
conjunction of the soul and the twenty-four material elements. One who
can see the constitution of the whole material manifestation as this
combination of the soul and material elements and also can see the
situation of the Supreme Soul becomes eligible for transfer to the
spiritual world. These things are meant for contemplation and for
realization, and one should have a complete understanding of this
chapter with the help of the spiritual master.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Thirteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Nature, the Enjoyer and
Consciousness.