Chapter 10
The Opulence of the Absolute
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
bhuya eva maha-baho
srnu me paramam vacah
yat te 'ham priyamanaya
vaksyami hita-kamyaya
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhuyah--
again; eva--certainly; maha-baho--O mighty-armed; srnu--just hear; me--
My; paramam--supreme; vacah--information; yat--that which; te--to you;
aham--I; priyamanaya--thinking you dear to Me; vaksyami--say; hita-
kamyaya--for your benefit.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said: My dear friend, mighty-armed Arjuna, listen
again to My supreme word, which I shall impart to you for your benefit
and which will give you great joy.
PURPORT
The word bhagavan is explained thus by Parasara Muni: one who is full
in six opulences, who has full strength, full fame, wealth, knowledge,
beauty and renunciation, is Bhagavan, or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. While Krsna was present on this earth, He displayed all six
opulences. Therefore great sages like Parasara Muni have all accepted
Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Now Krsna is instructing
Arjuna in more confidential knowledge of His opulences and His work.
Previously, beginning with the Seventh Chapter, the Lord already
explained His different energies and how they are acting. Now in this
chapter He explains His specific opulences to Arjuna. In the previous
chapter He has clearly explained His different energies to establish
devotion in firm conviction. Again in this chapter He tells Arjuna
about His manifestations and various opulences.
The more one hears about the Supreme God, the more one becomes fixed in
devotional service. One should always hear about the Lord in the
association of devotees; that will enhance one's devotional service.
Discourses in the society of devotees can take place only among those
who are really anxious to be in Krsna consciousness. Others cannot take
part in such discourses. The Lord clearly tells Arjuna that because he
is very dear to Him, for his benefit such discourses are taking place.
TEXT 2
na me viduh sura-ganah
prabhavam na maharsayah
aham adir hi devanam
maharsinam ca sarvasah
SYNONYMS
na--never; me--My; viduh--knows; sura-ganah--demigods; prabhavam--
opulences; na--never; maha-rsayah--great sages; aham--I am; adih--the
origin; hi--certainly; devanam--of the demigods; maha-rsinam--of the
great sages; ca--also; sarvasah--in all respects.
TRANSLATION
Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin, for,
in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and the sages.
PURPORT
As stated in the Brahma-samhita, Lord Krsna is the Supreme Lord. No one
is greater than Him; He is the cause of all causes. Here it is also
stated by the Lord personally that He is the cause of all the demigods
and sages. Even the demigods and great sages cannot understand Krsna;
they can understand neither His name nor His personality, so what is
the position of the so-called scholars of this tiny planet? No one can
understand why this Supreme God comes to earth as an ordinary human
being and executes such commonplace and yet wonderful activities. One
should know, then, that scholarship is not the qualification necessary
to understand Krsna. Even the demigods and the great sages have tried
to understand Krsna by their mental speculation, and they have failed
to do so. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is clearly said that even
the great demigods are not able to understand the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. They can speculate to the limits of their imperfect senses
and can reach the opposite conclusion of impersonalism, of something
not manifested by the three qualities of material nature, or they can
imagine something by mental speculation, but it is not possible to
understand Krsna by such foolish speculation.
Here the Lord indirectly says that if anyone wants to know the Absolute
Truth, "Here I am present as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I am
the Supreme." One should know this. Although one cannot understand the
inconceivable Lord who is personally present, He nonetheless exists. We
can actually understand Krsna, who is eternal, full of bliss and
knowledge, simply by studying His words in Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-
Bhagavatam. The impersonal Brahman can be conceived by persons who are
already in the inferior energy of the Lord, but the Personality of
Godhead cannot be conceived unless one is in the transcendental
position.
Because most men cannot understand Krsna in His actual situation, out
of His causeless mercy He descends to show favor to such speculators.
Yet despite the Supreme Lord's uncommon activities, these speculators,
due to contamination in the material energy, still think that the
impersonal Brahman is the Supreme. Only the devotees who are fully
surrendered unto the Supreme Lord can understand, by the grace of the
Supreme Personality, that He is Krsna. The devotees of the Lord do not
bother about the impersonal Brahman conception of God; their faith and
devotion bring them to surrender immediately unto the Supreme Lord, and
out of the causeless mercy of Krsna, they can understand Krsna. No one
else can understand Him. So even great sages agree: What is atma, what
is the Supreme? It is He whom we have to worship.
TEXT 3
yo mam ajam anadim ca
vetti loka-mahesvaram
asammudhah sa martyesu
sarva-papaih pramucyate
SYNONYMS
yah--anyone who; mam--unto Me; ajam--unborn; anadim--without beginning;
ca--also; vetti--knows; loka--the planets; maha-isvaram--the supreme
master; asammudhah--without doubt; sah--he; martyesu--among those
subject to death; sarva-papaih--from all sinful reactions; pramucyate--
is delivered.
TRANSLATION
He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme
Lord of all the worlds--he, undeluded among men, is freed from all
sins.
PURPORT
As stated in the Seventh Chapter (7.3), those who are trying to elevate
themselves to the platform of spiritual realization are not ordinary
men. They are superior to millions and millions of ordinary men who
have no knowledge of spiritual realization, but out of those actually
trying to understand their spiritual situation, one who can come to the
understanding that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
proprietor of everything, the unborn, is the most successful
spiritually realized person. In that stage only, when one has fully
understood Krsna's supreme position, can one be free completely from
all sinful reactions.
Here the word aja, meaning unborn, should not be confused with the
living entities, who are described in the Second Chapter as aja. The
Lord is different from the living entities who are taking birth and
dying due to material attachment. The conditioned souls are changing
their bodies, but His body is not changeable. Even when He comes to
this material world, He comes as the same unborn; therefore in the
Fourth Chapter it is said that the Lord, by His internal potency, is
not under the inferior material energy, but is always in the superior
energy.
He was existing before the creation, and He is different from His
creation. All the demigods were created within this material world, but
as far as Krsna is concerned, it is said that He is not created;
therefore Krsna is different even from the great demigods like Brahma
and Siva. And because He is the creator of Brahma, Siva and all the
other demigods, He is the Supreme Person of all planets.
Sri Krsna is therefore different from everything that is created, and
anyone who knows Him as such immediately becomes liberated from all
sinful reaction. One must be liberated from all sinful activities to be
in the knowledge of the Supreme Lord. Only by devotional service can He
be known and not by any other means, as stated in Bhagavad-gita.
One should not try to understand Krsna as a human being. As stated
previously, only a foolish person thinks Him to be a human being. This
is again expressed here in a different way. A man who is not foolish,
who is intelligent enough to understand the constitutional position of
the Godhead, is always free from all sinful reactions.
If Krsna is known as the son of Devaki, then how can He be unborn? That
is also explained in the Srimad-Bhagavatam: When He appeared before
Devaki and Vasudeva, He was not born as an ordinary child; He appeared
in His original form, and then He transformed Himself into an ordinary
child.
Anything done under the direction of Krsna is transcendental. It cannot
be contaminated by the material reactions, which may be auspicious or
inauspicious. The conception that there are things auspicious and
inauspicious in the material world is more or less a mental concoction
because there is nothing auspicious in the material world. Everything
is inauspicious because the very material mask is inauspicious. We
simply imagine it to be auspicious. Real auspiciousness depends on
activities in Krsna consciousness in full devotion and service.
Therefore if we at all want our activities to be auspicious, then we
should work under the directions of the Supreme Lord. Such directions
are given in authoritative scriptures such as Srimad-Bhagavatam and
Bhagavad-gita, or from a bona fide spiritual master. Because the
spiritual master is the representative of the Supreme Lord, his
direction is directly the direction of the Supreme Lord. The spiritual
master, saintly persons and scriptures direct in the same way. There is
no contradiction in these three sources. All actions done under such
direction are free from the reactions of pious or impious activities of
this material world. The transcendental attitude of the devotee in the
performance of activities is actually that of renunciation, and this is
called sannyasa. Anyone acting under the direction of the Supreme Lord
is actually a sannyasi and a yogi, and not the man who has simply taken
the dress of the sannyasi, or a pseudo yogi.
TEXTS 4-5
buddhir jnanam asammohah
ksama satyam damah samah
sukham duhkham bhavo 'bhavo
bhayam cabhayam eva ca
ahimsa samata tustis
tapo danam yaso 'yasah
bhavanti bhava bhutanam
matta eva prthag-vidhah
SYNONYMS
buddhih--intelligence; jnanam--knowledge; asammohah--freedom from
doubt; ksama--forgiveness; satyam--truthfulness; damah--control of the
senses; samah--control of the mind; sukham--happiness; duhkham--
distress; bhavah--birth; abhavah--death; bhayam--fear; ca--and;
abhayam--without fear; eva--also; ca--and; ahimsa--nonviolence; samata-
-equilibrium; tustih--satisfaction; tapah--penance; danam--charity;
yasah--fame; ayasah--infamy; bhavanti--become; bhavah--natures;
bhutanam--of living entities; mattah--from Me; eva--certainly; prthak-
vidhah--differently arranged.
TRANSLATION
Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness,
truthfulness, self-control and calmness, pleasure and pain, birth,
death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction,
austerity, charity, fame and infamy are created by Me alone.
PURPORT
The different qualities of living entities, be they good or bad, are
all created by Krsna, and they are described here.
Intelligence refers to the power of analyzing things in proper
perspective, and knowledge refers to understanding what is spirit and
what is matter. Ordinary knowledge obtained by a university education
pertains only to matter, and it is not accepted here as knowledge.
Knowledge means knowing the distinction between spirit and matter. In
modern education there is no knowledge about the spirit; they are
simply taking care of the material elements and bodily needs. Therefore
academic knowledge is not complete.
Asammoha, freedom from doubt and delusion, can be achieved when one is
not hesitant and when he understands the transcendental philosophy.
Slowly but surely he becomes free from bewilderment. Nothing should be
accepted blindly; everything should be accepted with care and with
caution. Ksama, forgiveness, should be practiced, and one should excuse
the minor offenses of others. Satyam, truthfulness, means that facts
should be presented as they are for the benefit of others. Facts should
not be misrepresented. According to social conventions, it is said that
one can speak the truth only when it is palatable to others. But that
is not truthfulness. The truth should be spoken in a straightforward
way, so that others will understand actually what the facts are. If a
man is a thief and if people are warned that he is a thief, that is
truth. Although sometimes the truth is unpalatable, one should not
refrain from speaking it. Truthfulness demands that the facts be
presented as they are for the benefit of others. That is the definition
of truth.
Self-control means that the senses should not be used for unnecessary
personal enjoyment. There is no prohibition against meeting the proper
needs of the senses but unnecessary sense enjoyment is detrimental for
spiritual advancement. Therefore the senses should be restrained from
unnecessary use. Similarly, the mind should not indulge in unnecessary
thoughts; that is called sama, or calmness. Nor should one spend one's
time pondering over earning money. That is a misuse of the thinking
power. The mind should be used to understand the prime necessity of
human beings, and that should be presented authoritatively. The power
of thought should be developed in association with persons who are
authorities in the scriptures, saintly persons and spiritual masters
and those whose thinking is highly developed. Sukham, pleasure or
happiness, should always be in that which is favorable for the
cultivation of the spiritual knowledge of Krsna consciousness. And
similarly, that which is painful or which causes distress is that which
is unfavorable for the cultivation of Krsna consciousness. Anything
favorable for the development of Krsna consciousness should be
accepted, and anything unfavorable should be rejected.
Bhava, birth, should be understood to refer to the body. As far as the
soul is concerned, there is neither birth nor death; that we have
discussed in the beginning of Bhagavad-gita. Birth and death apply to
one's embodiment in the material world. Fear is due to worrying about
the future. A person in Krsna consciousness has no fear because by his
activities he is sure to go back to the spiritual sky, back home, back
to Godhead. Therefore his future is very bright. Others, however, do
not know what their future holds; they have no knowledge of what the
next life holds. So they are therefore in constant anxiety. If we want
to get free from anxiety, then the best course is to understand Krsna
and be situated always in Krsna consciousness. In that way we will be
free from all fear. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.2.37) it is stated
that fear is caused by our absorption in the illusory energy, but those
who are free from the illusory energy, those who are confident that
they are not the material body, that they are spiritual parts of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and are therefore engaged in the
transcendental service of the Supreme Godhead, have nothing to fear.
Their future is very bright. This fear is a condition of persons who
are not in Krsna consciousness. Abhayam, fearlessness, is only possible
for one in Krsna consciousness.
Ahimsa, nonviolence, means that one should not do anything which will
put others into misery or confusion. Material activities that are
promised by so many politicians, sociologists, philanthropists, etc.,
do not produce very good results because the politicians and
philanthropists have no transcendental vision; they do not know what is
actually beneficial for human society. Ahimsa means that people should
be trained in such a way that the full utilization of the human body
can be achieved. The human body is meant for spiritual realization, so
any movement or any commissions which do not further that end commit
violence on the human body. That which furthers the future spiritual
happiness of the people in general is called nonviolence.
Samata, equanimity, refers to freedom from attachment and aversion. To
be very much attached or to be very much detached is not the best. This
material world should be accepted without attachment or aversion.
Similarly, that which is favorable for prosecuting Krsna consciousness
should be accepted; that which is unfavorable should be rejected. That
is called samata, equanimity. A person in Krsna consciousness has
nothing to reject and nothing to accept unless it is useful in the
prosecution of Krsna consciousness.
Tusti, satisfaction, means that one should not be eager to gather more
and more material goods by unnecessary activity. One should be
satisfied with whatever is obtained by the grace of the Supreme Lord;
that is called satisfaction. Tapas means austerity or penance. There
are many rules and definitions in the Vedas which apply here, like
rising early in the morning and taking a bath. Sometimes it is very
troublesome to rise early in the morning, but whatever voluntary
trouble one may suffer in this way is called penance. Similarly, there
are prescriptions for fasting on certain days of the month. One may not
be inclined to practice such fasting, but because of his determination
to make advancement in the science of Krsna consciousness, he should
accept such bodily troubles which are recommended. However, one should
not fast unnecessarily or against Vedic injunctions. One should not
fast for some political purpose; that is described in Bhagavad-gita as
fasting in ignorance, and anything done in ignorance or passion does
not lead to spiritual advancement. Everything done in the mode of
goodness does advance one, however, and fasting done in terms of the
Vedic injunctions enriches one in spiritual knowledge.
As far as charity is concerned, one should give fifty percent of his
earnings to some good cause. And what is a good cause? It is that which
is conducted in terms of Krsna consciousness. That is not only a good
cause, but it is the best cause. Because Krsna is good, His cause is
also good. Thus charity should be given to a person who is engaged in
Krsna consciousness. According to Vedic literature, it is enjoined that
charity should be given to the brahmanas. This practice is still
followed, although not very nicely in terms of the Vedic injunction.
But still the injunction is that charity should be given to the
brahmanas. Why? Because they are engaged in higher cultivation of
spiritual knowledge. A brahmana is supposed to devote his whole life to
understanding Brahman. A brahma-jana is one who knows Brahman; he is
called a brahmana. Thus charity is offered to the brahmanas because
since they are always engaged in higher spiritual service they have no
time to earn their livelihood. In the Vedic literature, charity is also
to be awarded to the renouncer of life, the sannyasi. The sannyasis beg
from door to door, not for money but for missionary purposes. The
system is that they go from door to door to awaken the householders
from the slumber of ignorance. Because the householders are engaged in
family affairs and have forgotten their actual purpose in life--
awakening their Krsna consciousness--it is the business of the
sannyasis to go as beggars to the householders and encourage them to be
Krsna conscious. As it is said in the Vedas, one should awake and
achieve what is due him in this human form of life. This knowledge and
method is distributed by the sannyasis; hence charity is to be given to
the renouncer of life, to the brahmanas, and similar good causes, not
to any whimsical cause.
Yasas, fame, should be according to Lord Caitanya, who said that a man
is famous when he is known as a great devotee. That is real fame. If
one has become a great man in Krsna consciousness and it is known, then
he is truly famous. One who does not have such fame is infamous.
All these qualities are manifest throughout the universe in human
society and in the society of the demigods. There are many forms of
humanity on other planets, and these qualities are there. Now, for one
who wants to advance in Krsna consciousness, Krsna creates all these
qualities, but the person develops them himself from within. One who
engages in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord develops all the
good qualities, as arranged by the Supreme Lord.
Of whatever we find, good or bad, the origin is Krsna. Nothing can
manifest in this material world which is not in Krsna. That is
knowledge; although we know that things are differently situated, we
should realize that everything flows from Krsna.
TEXT 6
maharsayah sapta purve
catvaro manavas tatha
mad-bhava manasa jata
yesam loka imah prajah
SYNONYMS
maha-rsayah--the great sages; sapta--seven; purve--before; catvarah--
four; manavah--Manus; tatha--also; mat-bhavah--born of Me; manasah--
from the mind; jatah--born; yesam--of them; loke--the planets; imah--
all this; prajah--population.
TRANSLATION
The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and
the Manus [progenitors of mankind] are born out of My mind, and all
creatures in these planets descend from them.
PURPORT
The Lord is giving a genealogical synopsis of the universal population.
Brahma is the original creature born out of the energy of the Supreme
Lord known as Hiranyagarbha. And from Brahma all the seven great sages,
and before them four other great sages, namely Sanaka, Sananda,
Sanatana and Sanat-kumara, and the Manus, are manifest. All these
twenty-five great sages are known as the patriarchs of the living
entities all over the universe. There are innumerable universes and
innumerable planets within each universe, and each planet is full of
population of different varieties. All of them are born of these
twenty-five patriarchs. Brahma underwent penance for one thousand years
of the demigods before he realized by the grace of Krsna how to create.
Then from Brahma Sanaka, Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat-kumara came out,
then Rudra, and then the seven sages, and in this way all the brahmanas
and ksatriyas are born out of the energy of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Brahma is known as Pitamaha, the grandfather, and Krsna is
known as the Prapitamaha, the father of the grandfather. That is stated
in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita (11.39).
TEXT 7
etam vibhutim yogam ca
mama yo vetti tattvatah
so 'vikalpena yogena
yujyate natra samsayah
SYNONYMS
etam--all this; vibhutim--opulence; yogam ca--also mystic power; mama--
of Mine; yah--anyone; vetti--knows; tattvatah--factual; sah--he;
avikalpena--without division; yogena--in devotional service; yujyate--
engaged; na--never; atra--here; samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATION
He who knows in truth this glory and power of Mine engages in unalloyed
devotional service; of this there is no doubt.
PURPORT
The highest summit of spiritual perfection is knowledge of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Unless one is firmly convinced of the different
opulences of the Supreme Lord, he cannot engage in devotional service.
Generally people know that God is great, but they do not know in detail
how God is great. Here are the details. If one knows factually how God
is great, then naturally he becomes a surrendered soul and engages
himself in the devotional service of the Lord. When one factually knows
the opulences of the Supreme, there is no alternative but to surrender
to Him. This factual knowledge can be known from the descriptions in
Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita and similar literatures.
In the administration of this universe there are many demigods
distributed throughout the planetary system, and the chief of them are
Brahma, Lord Siva and the four great Kumaras and other patriarchs.
There are many forefathers of the population of the universe, and all
of them are born of the Supreme Lord Krsna. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead Krsna, is the original forefather of all forefathers.
These are some of the opulences of the Supreme Lord. When one is firmly
convinced of them, he accepts Krsna with great faith and without any
doubt, and he engages in devotional service. All this particular
knowledge is required in order to increase one's interest in the loving
devotional service of the Lord. One should not neglect to understand
fully how great Krsna is, for by knowing the greatness of Krsna one
will be able to be fixed in sincere devotional service.
TEXT 8
aham sarvasya prabhavo
mattah sarvam pravartate
iti matva bhajante mam
budha bhava-samanvitah
SYNONYMS
aham--I; sarvasya--of all; prabhavah--source of generation; mattah--
from Me; sarvam--everything; pravartate--emanates; iti--thus; matva--
knowing; bhajante--becomes devoted; mam--unto Me; budhah--learned;
bhava-samanvitah--with great attention.
TRANSLATION
I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in My
devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.
PURPORT
A learned scholar who has studied the Vedas perfectly and has
information from authorities like Lord Caitanya and who knows how to
apply these teachings can understand that Krsna is the origin of
everything in both the material and spiritual worlds, and because he
knows this perfectly he becomes firmly fixed in the devotional service
of the Supreme Lord. He can never be deviated by any amount of
nonsensical commentaries or by fools. All Vedic literature agrees that
Krsna is the source of Brahma, Siva and all other demigods. In the
Atharva Veda (Gopala-tapani Upanisad 1.24) it is said, yo brahmanam
vidadhati purvam yo vai vedams ca gapayati sma krsnah: "It was Krsna
who in the beginning instructed Brahma in Vedic knowledge and who
disseminated Vedic knowledge in the past." Then again the Narayana
Upanisad says,(1) atha puruso ha vai narayano 'kamayata prajah
srjeyeti: "Then the Supreme Personality Narayana desired to create
living entities." Again it is said, narayanad brahma jayate, narayanad
prajapatih prajayate, narayanad indro jayate, narayanad astau vasavo
jayante, narayanad ekadasa rudra jayante, narayanad dvadasadityah:
"From Narayana, Brahma is born, and from Narayana, the patriarchs are
also born. From Narayana, Indra is born, from Narayana the eight Vasus
are born, from Narayana the eleven Rudras are born, from Narayana the
twelve Adityas are born."
It is said in the same Vedas, brahmanyo devaki-putrah: "The son of
Devaki, Krsna, is the Supreme Personality." (Narayana Upanisad 4) Then
it is said:
eko vai narayana asin na brahma na isano napo nagni samau neme
dyav-aprthivi na naksatrani na suryah sa ekaki na ramate tasya
dhyanantah sthasya yatra chandogaih kriyamanastakadi-samjnaka
stuti-stomah stomam ucyate.
"In the beginning of the creation there was only the Supreme
Personality Narayana. There was no Brahma, no Siva, no fire, no moon,
no stars in the sky, no sun. There was only Krsna, who creates all and
enjoys all" (Maha Upanisad 1)
In the Maha Upanisad it is said that Lord Siva was born from the
highest, the Supreme Lord Krsna, and the Vedas say that it is the
Supreme Lord, the creator of Brahma and Siva, who is to be worshiped.
In the Moksa-dharma Krsna also says,
prajapatim ca rudram capy
aham eva srjami vai
tau hi mam na vijanito
mama maya-vimohitau
"The patriarchs, Siva and others are created by Me, though they do not
know that they are created by Me because they are deluded by My
illusory energy." In the Varaha Purana it is also said,
narayanah paro devas
tasmaj jatas caturmukhah
tasmad rudro 'bhavad devah
sa ca sarva-jnatam gatah
"Narayana is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and from Him Brahma
was born, from whom Siva was born."
Lord Krsna is the source of all generations, and He is called the most
efficient cause of everything. He says that because "everything is born
of Me, I am the original source of all. Everything is under Me; no one
is above Me." There is no supreme controller other than Krsna. One who
understands Krsna in such a way from a bona fide spiritual master and
from Vedic literature, who engages all his energy in Krsna
consciousness, becomes a truly learned man. In comparison to him, all
others, who do not know Krsna properly, are but fools. Only a fool
would consider Krsna to be an ordinary man. A Krsna conscious person
should not be bewildered by fools; he should avoid all unauthorized
commentaries and interpretations on Bhagavad-gita and proceed in Krsna
consciousness with determination and firmness.
TEXT 9
mac-citta mad-gata-prana
bodhayantah parasparam
kathayantas ca mam nityam
tusyanti ca ramanti ca
SYNONYMS
mat-cittah--minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-pranah--lives devoted
to the service of Krsna; bodhayantah--preaching; parasparam--among
themselves; kathayantah ca--talking also; mam--about Me; nityam--
perpetually; 
tusyanti--are 
pleased; 
ca--also; 
ramanti--enjoy
transcendental bliss; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are
surrendered to Me, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss
enlightening one another and conversing about Me.
PURPORT
Pure devotees, whose characteristics are mentioned here, engage
themselves fully in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
Their minds cannot be diverted from the lotus feet of Krsna. Their
talks are solely on the transcendental subjects. The symptoms of the
pure devotees are described in this verse specifically. Devotees of the
Supreme Lord are twenty-four hours daily engaged in glorifying the
pastimes of the Supreme Lord. Their hearts and souls are constantly
submerged in Krsna, and they take pleasure in discussing Him with other
devotees.
In the preliminary stage of devotional service they relish the
transcendental pleasure from the service itself, and in the mature
stage they are actually situated in love of God. Once situated in that
transcendental position, they can relish the highest perfection which
is exhibited by the Lord in His abode. Lord Caitanya likens
transcendental devotional service to the sowing of a seed in the heart
of the living entity. There are innumerable living entities traveling
throughout the different planets of the universe, and out of them there
are a few who are fortunate enough to meet a pure devotee and get the
chance to understand devotional service. This devotional service is
just like a seed, and if it is sown in the heart of a living entity,
and if he goes on hearing and chanting, Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, that seed
fructifies, just as the seed of a tree fructifies with regular
watering. The spiritual plant of devotional service gradually grows and
grows until it penetrates the covering of the material universe and
enters into the brahmajyoti effulgence in the spiritual sky. In the
spiritual sky also that plant grows more and more until it reaches the
highest planet, which is called Goloka Vrndavana, the supreme planet of
Krsna. Ultimately, the plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of
Krsna and rests there. Gradually as the plant grows fruits and flowers,
that plant of devotional service also produces fruits, and the watering
process in the form of chanting and hearing goes on. This plant of
devotional service is fully described in the Caitanya-caritamrta
(Madhya-lila, Chapter Nineteen). It is explained there that when the
complete plant takes shelter under the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord,
one becomes fully absorbed in love of God; then he cannot live even for
a moment without being in contact with the Supreme Lord, just as a fish
cannot live without water. In such a state, the devotee actually
attains the transcendental qualities in contact with the Supreme Lord.
The Srimad-Bhagavatam is also full of such narrations about the
relationship between the Supreme Lord and His devotees; therefore the
Srimad-Bhagavatam is very dear to the devotees. In this narration there
is nothing about material activities, sense gratification or
liberation. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the only narration in which the
transcendental nature of the Supreme Lord and His devotees is fully
described. Thus the realized souls in Krsna consciousness take
continual pleasure in hearing such transcendental literatures, just as
a young boy and girl take pleasure in association.
TEXT 10
tesam satata-yuktanam
bhajatam priti-purvakam
dadami buddhi-yogam tam
yena mam upayanti te
SYNONYMS
tesam--unto them; satata-yuktanam--always engaged; bhajatam--in
devotional service; priti-purvakam--in loving ecstasy; dadami--I give;
buddhi-yogam--real intelligence; tam--that; yena--by which; mam--unto
Me; upayanti--come; te--they.
TRANSLATION
To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give
the understanding by which they can come to Me.
PURPORT
In this verse the word buddhi-yogam is very significant. We may
remember that in the Second Chapter the Lord, instructing Arjuna, said
that He had spoken to him of many things and that He would instruct him
in the way of buddhi-yoga. Now buddhi-yoga is explained. Buddhi-yoga
itself is action in Krsna consciousness; that is the highest
intelligence. Buddhi means intelligence, and yoga means mystic
activities or mystic elevation. When one tries to go back home, back to
Godhead, and takes fully to Krsna consciousness in devotional service,
his action is called buddhi yoga. In other words, buddhi-yoga is the
process by which one gets out of the entanglement of this material
world. The ultimate goal of progress is Krsna. People do not know this;
therefore the association of devotees and a bona fide spiritual master
are important. One should know that the goal is Krsna, and when the
goal is assigned, then the path is slowly but progressively traversed,
and the ultimate goal is achieved.
When a person knows the goal of life but is addicted to the fruits of
activities, he is acting in karma-yoga. When he knows that the goal is
Krsna, but he takes pleasure in mental speculations to understand
Krsna, he is acting in jnana-yoga. And when he knows the goal and seeks
Krsna completely in Krsna consciousness and devotional service, he is
acting in bhakti-yoga, or buddhi-yoga, which is the complete yoga. This
complete yoga is the highest perfectional stage of life.
A person may have a bona fide spiritual master and may be attached to a
spiritual organization, but still, if he is not intelligent enough to
make progress, then Krsna from within gives him instructions so that he
may ultimately come to Him without difficulty. The qualification is
that a person always engage himself in Krsna consciousness and with
love and devotion render all kinds of services. He should perform some
sort of work for Krsna, and that work should be with love. If a devotee
is intelligent enough he will make progress on the path of self-
realization. If one is sincere and devoted to the activities of
devotional service, the Lord gives him a chance to make progress and
ultimately attain to Him.
TEXT 11
tesam evanukampartham
aham ajnana-jam tamah
nasayamy atma-bhavastho
jnana-dipena bhasvata
SYNONYMS
tesam--for them; eva--certainly; anukampa-artham--to show special
mercy; aham--I; ajnana-jam--due to ignorance; tamah--darkness;
nasayami--dispel; atma--within; bhavasthah--themselves; jnana--of
knowledge; dipena--with the lamp; bhasvata--glowing.
TRANSLATION
Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.
PURPORT
When Lord Caitanya was in Benares promulgating the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare, thousands of people were following Him. Prakasananda,
a very influential and learned scholar in Benares at that time, derided
Lord Caitanya for being a sentimentalist. Sometimes philosophers
criticize the devotees because they think that most of the devotees are
in the darkness of ignorance and are philosophically naive
sentimentalists. Actually that is not the fact. There are very, very
learned scholars who have put forward the philosophy of devotion, but
even if a devotee does not take advantage of their literatures or of
his spiritual master, if he is sincere in his devotional service he is
helped by Krsna Himself within his heart. So the sincere devotee
engaged in Krsna consciousness cannot be without knowledge. The only
qualification is that one carry out devotional service in full Krsna
consciousness.
The modern philosophers think that without discriminating one cannot
have pure knowledge. For them this answer is given by the Supreme Lord:
those who are engaged in pure devotional service, even though they be
without sufficient education and even without sufficient knowledge of
the Vedic principles, are still helped by the Supreme God, as stated in
this verse.
The Lord tells Arjuna that basically there is no possibility of
understanding the Supreme Truth, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, simply by speculating, for the Supreme Truth is
so great that it is not possible to understand Him or to achieve Him
simply by making a mental effort. Man can go on speculating for several
millions of years, and if he is not devoted, if he is not a lover of
the Supreme Truth, he will never understand Krsna or the Supreme Truth.
Only by devotional service is the Supreme Truth, Krsna, pleased and by
His inconceivable energy He can reveal Himself to the heart of the pure
devotee. The pure devotee always has Krsna within his heart; therefore
he is just like the sun that dissipates the darkness of ignorance. This
is the special mercy rendered to the pure devotee by Krsna.
Due to the contamination of material association, through many, many
millions of births, one's heart is always covered with the dust of
materialism, but when one engages in devotional service and constantly
chants Hare Krsna, the dust quickly clears and one is elevated to the
platform of pure knowledge. The ultimate goal of Visnu can be attained
only by this chant and devotional service, and not by mental
speculation or argument. The pure devotee does not have to worry about
the necessities of life; he need not be anxious because when he removes
the darkness from his heart, everything is provided automatically by
the Supreme Lord, for He is pleased by the loving devotional service of
the devotee. This is the essence of the Gita's teachings. By studying
Bhagavad-gita, one can become a completely surrendered soul to the
Supreme Lord and engage himself in pure devotional service. As the Lord
takes charge, one becomes completely free from all kinds of
materialistic endeavors.
TEXTS 12-13
arjuna uvaca
param brahma param dhama
pavitram paramam bhavan
purusam sasvatam divyam
adi-devam ajam vibhum
ahus tvam rsayah sarve
devarsir naradas tatha
asito devalo vyasah
svayam caiva bravisi me
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; param--supreme; brahma--truth; param--
supreme; dhama--sustenance; pavitram--purest; paramam--supreme; bhavan-
-Yourself; 
purusam--personality; 
sasvatam--original; 
divyam--
transcendental; adi-devam--original Lord; ajam--unborn; vibhum--
greatest; ahuh--say; tvam--unto You; rsayah--sages; sarve--all; deva-
rsih--the sage among the demigods; naradah--Narada; tatha--also;
asitah--Asita; devalah--Devala; vyasah--Vyasa; svayam--personally; ca--
also; eva--certainly; bravisi--explaining; me--unto me.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme
abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person.
You are the primal God, transcendental and original, and You are the
unborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great sages such as Narada,
Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of You, and now You Yourself are
declaring it to me.
PURPORT
In these two verses the Supreme Lord gives a chance to the modern
philosopher, for here it is clear that the Supreme is different from
the individual soul. Arjuna, after hearing the essential four verses of
Bhagavad-gita in this chapter, became completely free from all doubts
and accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He at once
boldly declares, "You are param brahma, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead." And previously Krsna stated that He is the originator of
everything and everyone. Every demigod and every human being is
dependent on Him. Men and demigods, out of ignorance, think that they
are absolute and independent of the Supreme Lord Krsna. That ignorance
is removed perfectly by the discharge of devotional service. This is
already explained in the previous verse by the Lord. Now by His grace,
Arjuna is accepting Him as the Supreme Truth, in concordance with the
Vedic injunction. It is not because Krsna is an intimate friend of
Arjuna that he is flattering Him by calling Him the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the Absolute Truth. Whatever Arjuna says in these two
verses is confirmed by Vedic truth. Vedic injunctions affirm that only
one who takes to devotional service to the Supreme Lord can understand
Him, whereas others cannot. Each and every word of this verse spoken by
Arjuna is confirmed by Vedic injunction.
In the Kena Upanisad it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is the rest
for everything, and Krsna has already explained that everything is
resting on Him. The Mundaka Upanisad confirms that the Supreme Lord, in
whom everything is resting, can be realized only by those who engage
constantly in thinking of Him. This constant thinking of Krsna is
smaranam, one of the methods of devotional service. It is only by
devotional service to Krsna that one can understand his position and
get rid of this material body.
In the Vedas the Supreme Lord is accepted as the purest of the pure.
One who understands that Krsna is the purest of the pure can become
purified from all sinful activities. One cannot be disinfected from
sinful activities unless he surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. Arjuna's
acceptance of Krsna as the supreme pure complies with the injunctions
of Vedic literature. This is also confirmed by great personalities, of
whom Narada is the chief.
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and one should always
meditate upon Him and enjoy one's transcendental relationship with Him.
He is the supreme existence. He is free from bodily needs, birth and
death. Not only does Arjuna confirm this, but all the Vedic
literatures, the Puranas and histories. In all Vedic literatures Krsna
is thus described, and the Supreme Lord Himself also says in the Fourth
Chapter, "Although I am unborn, I appear on this earth to establish
religious principles." He is the supreme origin; He has no cause, for
He is the cause of all causes, and everything is emanating from Him.
This perfect knowledge can be had by the grace of the Supreme Lord.
Here Arjuna expresses himself through the grace of Krsna. If we want to
understand Bhagavad-gita, we should accept the statements in these two
verses. This is called the parampara system, acceptance of the
disciplic succession. Unless one is in the disciplic succession, he
cannot understand Bhagavad-gita. It is not possible by so-called
academic education. Unfortunately those proud of their academic
education, despite so much evidence in Vedic literatures, stick to
their obstinate conviction that Krsna is an ordinary person.
TEXT 14
sarvam etad rtam manye
yan mam vadasi kesava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktim
vidur deva na danavah
SYNONYMS
sarvam--all; etat--these; rtam--truths; manye--accept; yat--which; mam-
-unto me; vadasi--You tell; kesava--O Krsna; na--never; hi--certainly;
te--Your; bhagavan--O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim--revelation;
viduh--can know; devah--the demigods; na--nor; danavah--the demons.
TRANSLATION
O Krsna, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither
the gods nor demons, O Lord, know Thy personality.
PURPORT
Arjuna herein confirms that persons of faithless and demonic nature
cannot understand Krsna. He is not even known by the demigods, so what
to speak of the so-called scholars of this modern world? By the grace
of the Supreme Lord, Arjuna has understood that the Supreme Truth is
Krsna and that He is the perfect one. One should therefore follow the
path of Arjuna. He received the authority of Bhagavad-gita. As
described in the Fourth Chapter, the parampara system of disciplic
succession for the understanding of Bhagavad-gita was lost, and
therefore Krsna reestablished that disciplic succession with Arjuna
because He considered Arjuna His intimate friend and a great devotee.
Therefore, as stated in our Introduction to Gitopanisad, Bhagavad-gita
should be understood in the parampara system. When the parampara system
was lost, Arjuna was again selected to rejuvenate it. The acceptance of
Arjuna of all that Krsna says should be emulated; then we can
understand the essence of Bhagavad-gita, and then only can we
understand that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
svayam evatmanatmanam
vettha tvam purusottama
bhuta-bhavana bhutesa
deva-deva jagat-pate
SYNONYMS
svayam--personality; eva--certainly; atmana--by Yourself; atmanam--
Yourself; vettha--know; tvam--You; purusa-uttama--O greatest of all
persons; bhuta-bhavana--O origin of everything; bhuta-isa--O Lord of
everything; deva-deva--O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate--O Lord of
the entire universe.
TRANSLATION
Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own potencies, O origin of all,
Lord of all beings, God of gods, O Supreme Person, Lord of the
universe!
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord Krsna can be known by persons who are in a
relationship with Him through the discharge of devotional service, like
Arjuna and his followers. Persons of demonic or atheistic mentality
cannot know Krsna. Mental speculation that leads one away from the
Supreme Lord is a serious sin, and one who does not know Krsna should
not try to comment on Bhagavad-gita. Bhagavad-gita is the statement of
Krsna, and since it is the science of Krsna, it should be understood
from Krsna as Arjuna understood it. It should not be received from
atheistic persons.
The Supreme Truth is realized in three aspects: as impersonal Brahman,
localized Paramatma and at last as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
So at the last stage of understanding the Absolute Truth, one comes to
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A liberated man and even a common
man may realize impersonal Brahman or localized Paramatma, yet they may
not understand God's personality from the verses of Bhagavad-gita,
which are being spoken by this person, Krsna. Sometimes the
impersonalists accept Krsna as Bhagavan, or they accept His authority.
Yet many liberated persons cannot understand Krsna as Purusottama, the
Supreme Person, the father of all living entities. Therefore Arjuna
addresses Him as Purusottama. And if one comes to know Him as the
father of all the living entities, still one may not know Him as the
supreme controller; therefore He is addressed here as Bhutesa, the
supreme controller of everyone. And even if one knows Krsna as the
supreme controller of all living entities, still one may not know that
He is the origin of all the demigods; therefore He is addressed herein
as Devadeva, the worshipful God of all demigods. And even if one knows
Him as the worshipful God of all demigods, one may not know that He is
the supreme proprietor of everything; therefore He is addressed as
Jagatpati. Thus the truth about Krsna is established in this verse by
the realization of Arjuna, and we should follow in the footsteps of
Arjuna to understand Krsna as He is.
TEXT 16
vaktum arhasy asesena
divya hy atma-vibhutayah
yabhir vibhutibhir lokan
imams tvam vyapya tisthasi
SYNONYMS
vaktum--to say; arhasi--deserve; asesena--in detail; divyah--divine;
hi--certainly; atma--Yourself; vibhutayah--opulences; yabhih--by which;
vibhutibhih--opulences; lokan--all the planets; iman--these; tvam--You;
vyapya--pervading; tisthasi--remain.
TRANSLATION
Please tell me in detail of Your divine powers by which You pervade all
these worlds and abide in them.
PURPORT
In this verse it appears that Arjuna is already satisfied with his
understanding of the Supreme Lord Krsna. By Krsna's grace, Arjuna has
personal experience, intelligence and knowledge and whatever else a
person may have through all these agencies, and he has understood Krsna
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For him there is no doubt, yet
he is asking Krsna to explain His all-pervading nature so that in the
future people will understand, especially the impersonalists, how He
exists in His all-pervading aspect through His different energies. One
should know that this is being asked by Arjuna on behalf of the common
people.
TEXT 17
katham vidyam aham yogims
tvam sada paricintayan
kesu kesu ca bhavesu
cintyo 'si bhagavan maya
SYNONYMS
katham--how; vidyam aham--shall I know; yogin--O supreme mystic; tvam--
You; sada--always; paricintayan--thinking; kesu--in which; kesu--in
which; ca--also; bhavesu--nature; cintyah asi--You are remembered;
bhagavan--O Supreme; maya--by me.
TRANSLATION
How shall I meditate on You? In what various forms are You to be
remembered, O Blessed Lord?
PURPORT
As it is stated in the previous chapter, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is covered by His yoga-maya. Only surrendered souls and
devotees can see Him. Now Arjuna is convinced that His friend, Krsna,
is the Supreme Godhead, but he wants to know the general process by
which the all-pervading Lord can be understood by the common man. No
common men, including the demons and atheists, can know Krsna because
He is guarded by His yoga-maya energy. Again, these questions are asked
by Arjuna for their benefit. The superior devotee is not only concerned
for his own understanding, but for the understanding of all mankind.
Out of his mercy, because he is a Vaisnava, a devotee, Arjuna is
opening the understanding for the common man as far as the all-
pervasiveness of the Supreme is concerned. He addresses Krsna
specifically as yogin because Sri Krsna is the master of the yoga-maya
energy by which He is covered and uncovered to the common man. The
common man who has no love for Krsna cannot always think of Krsna;
therefore he has to think materially. Arjuna is considering the mode of
thinking of the materialistic persons of this world. Because
materialists cannot understand Krsna spiritually, they are advised to
concentrate the mind on physical things and try to see how Krsna is
manifested by physical representations.
TEXT 18
vistarenatmano yogam
vibhutim ca janardana
bhuyah kathaya trptir hi
srnvato nasti me 'mrtam
SYNONYMS
vistarena--in description; atmanah--of Yourself; yogam--mystic power;
vibhutim--opulences; ca--also; jana-ardana--O killer of the atheists;
bhuyah--again; kathaya--describe; trptih--satisfaction; hi--certainly;
srnvatah--hearing; na asti--there is not; me--my; amrtam--nectar.
TRANSLATION
Tell me again in detail, O Janardana [Krsna], of Your mighty potencies
and glories, for I never tire of hearing Your ambrosial words.
PURPORT
A similar statement was made to Suta Gosvami by the rsis of
Naimisaranya, headed by Saunaka. That statement is:
vayam tu na vitrpyama
uttama-sloka-vikrame
yac chrnvatam rasa-jnanam
svadu svadu pade pade
"One can never be satiated even though one continuously hears the
transcendental pastimes of Krsna, who is glorified by Vedic hymns.
Those who have entered into a transcendental relationship with Krsna
relish in every step descriptions of the pastimes of the Lord."
(Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.1.19) Thus Arjuna is interested to hear about
Krsna, specifically how He remains as the all-pervading Supreme Lord.
Now as far as amrtam, nectar, is concerned, any narration or statement
concerning Krsna is just like nectar. And this nectar can be perceived
by practical experience. Modern stories, fiction and histories are
different from the transcendental pastimes of the Lord in that one will
tire of hearing mundane stories, but one never tires of hearing about
Krsna. It is for this reason only that the history of the whole
universe is replete with references to the pastimes of the incarnations
of Godhead. For instance, the Puranas are histories of bygone ages that
relate the pastimes of the various incarnations of the Lord. In this
way the reading matter remains forever fresh, despite repeated
readings.
TEXT 19
sri-bhagavan uvaca
hanta te kathayisyami
divya hy atma-vibhutayah
pradhanyatah kuru-srestha
nasty anto vistarasya me
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta--
yes; te--unto you; kathayisyami--I shall speak; divyah--divine; hi--
certainly; 
atma-vibhutayah--personal 
opulences; 
pradhanyatah--
principally; kuru-srestha--O best of the Kurus; na asti--there is no;
antah--limit; vistarasya--to the extent; me--My.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous
manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna, for My
opulence is limitless.
PURPORT
It is not possible to comprehend the greatness of Krsna and His
opulences. The senses of the individual soul are imperfect and do not
permit him to understand the totality of Krsna's affairs. Still the
devotees try to understand Krsna, but not on the principle that they
will be able to understand Krsna fully at any specific time or in any
state of life. Rather, the very topics of Krsna are so relishable that
they appear to them as nectar. Thus they enjoy them. In discussing
Krsna's opulences and His diverse energies, the pure devotees take
transcendental pleasure. Therefore they want to hear and discuss them.
Krsna knows that living entities do not understand the extent of His
opulences; He therefore agrees to state only the principal
manifestations of His different energies. The word pradhanyatah
(principal) is very important because we can understand only a few of
the principal details of the Supreme Lord, for His features are
unlimited. It is not possible to understand them all. And vibhuti, as
used in this verse, refers to the opulences by which He controls the
whole manifestation. In the Amara-kosa dictionary it is stated that
vibhuti indicates an exceptional opulence.
The impersonalist or the pantheist cannot understand the exceptional
opulences of the Supreme Lord nor the manifestations of His divine
energy. Both in the material world and in the spiritual world His
energies are distributed in every variety of manifestation. Now Krsna
is describing what can be directly perceived by the common man; thus
part of His variegated energy is described in this way.
TEXT 20
aham atma gudakesa
sarva-bhutasaya-sthitah
aham adis ca madhyam ca
bhutanam anta eva ca
SYNONYMS
aham--I; atma--soul; gudakesa--O Arjuna; sarva-bhuta--all living
entities; asaya-sthitah--situated within; aham--I am; adih--origin; ca-
-also; madhyam--middle; ca--also; bhutanam--all living entities; antah-
-end; eva--certainly; ca--and.
TRANSLATION
I am the Self, O Gudakesa, seated in the hearts of all creatures. I am
the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.
PURPORT
In this verse Arjuna is addressed as Gudakesa, which means one who has
conquered the darkness of sleep. For those who are sleeping in the
darkness of ignorance it is not possible to understand how the Supreme
Personality of Godhead manifests Himself in the material and spiritual
worlds. Thus this address by Krsna to Arjuna is significant. Because
Arjuna is above such darkness, the Personality of Godhead agrees to
describe His various opulences.
Krsna first informs Arjuna that He is the Self or soul of the entire
cosmic manifestation by dint of His primary expansion. Before the
material creation, the Supreme Lord, by His plenary expansion, accepts
the purusa incarnations, and from Him everything begins. Therefore He
is atma, the soul of the mahat-tattva, the universal elements. The
total material energy is not the cause of the creation but actually the
Maha-Visnu enters into the mahat-tattva, the total material energy. He
is the soul. When Maha-Visnu enters into the manifested universes, He
again manifests Himself as the Supersoul in each and every entity. We
have experience that the personal body of the living entity exists due
to the presence of the spiritual spark. Without the existence of the
spiritual spark, the body cannot develop. Similarly, the material
manifestation cannot develop unless the Supreme Soul of Krsna enters.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is existing as the Supersoul in all
manifested universes. A description of the three purusa-avataras is
given in Srimad-Bhagavatam: "The Supreme Personality of Godhead
manifests three features, as Karanodakasayi Visnu, Garbhodakasayi Visnu
and Ksirodakasayi Visnu, in this material manifestation." The Supreme
Lord, Krsna, the cause of all causes, lies down in the cosmic ocean as
Maha-Visnu or Karanodakasayi Visnu, and therefore Krsna is the
beginning of this universe, the maintainer of the universal
manifestation, and the end of all the energy.
TEXT 21
adityanam aham visnur
jyotisam ravir amsuman
maricir marutam asmi
naksatranam aham sasi
SYNONYMS
adityanam--of the Adityas; aham--I am; visnuh--the Supreme Lord;
jyotisam--of all luminaries; ravih--the sun; amsu-man--radiant;
maricih--Marici; marutam--of the Maruts; asmi--I am; naksatranam--of
stars; aham--I am; sasi--the moon.
TRANSLATION
Of the Adityas I am Visnu, of lights I am the radiant sun, I am Marici
of the Maruts, and among the stars I am the moon.
PURPORT
There are twelve Adityas, of which Krsna is the principal. And among
all the luminaries twinkling in the sky, the sun is the chief, and in
the Brahma-samhita the sun is accepted as the glowing effulgence of the
Supreme Lord and is considered to be one of His eyes. Marici is the
controlling deity of of the heavenly spaces. Among the stars, the moon
is the most prominent at night, and thus the moon represents Krsna.
TEXT 22
vedanam sama-vedo 'smi
devanam asmi vasavah
indriyanam manas casmi
bhutanam asmi cetana
SYNONYMS
vedanam--of all the Vedas; sama-vedah--the Sama Veda; asmi--I am;
devanam--of all the demigods; asmi--I am; vasavah--heavenly king;
indriyanam--of all the senses; manah--the mind; ca--also; asmi--I am;
bhutanam--of all living entities; asmi--I am; cetana--the living force.
TRANSLATION
Of the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the demigods I am Indra; of the
senses I am the mind, and in living beings I am the living force
[knowledge].
PURPORT
The difference between matter and spirit is that matter has no
consciousness like the living entity; therefore this consciousness is
supreme and eternal. Consciousness cannot be produced by a combination
of matter.
TEXT 23
rudranam sankaras casmi
vitteso yaksa-raksasam
vasunam pavakas casmi
meruh sikharinam aham
SYNONYMS
rudranam--of all the Rudras; sankarah--Lord Siva; ca--also; asmi--I am;
vitta-isah--the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yaksa-raksasam--
of the Yaksas and Raksasas; vasunam--of the Vasus; pavakah--fire; ca--
also; asmi--I am; meruh--Meru; sikharinam--of all mountains; aham--I
am.
TRANSLATION
Of all the Rudras I am Lord Siva; of the Yaksas and Raksasas I am the
Lord of wealth [Kuvera]; of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and of
mountains I am Meru.
PURPORT
There are eleven Rudras, of whom Sankara, Lord Siva, is predominant. He
is the incarnation of the Supreme Lord in charge of the mode of
ignorance in the universe. Among the demigods Kuvera is the chief
treasurer, and he is a representation of the Supreme Lord. Meru is a
mountain famed for its rich natural resources.
TEXT 24
purodhasam ca mukhyam mam
viddhi partha brhaspatim
senaninam aham skandah
sarasam asmi sagarah
SYNONYMS
purodhasam--of all priests; ca--also; mukhyam--chief; mam--Me; viddhi--
understand; partha--O son of Prtha; brhaspatim--Brhaspati; senaninam--
of all commanders; aham--I am; skandah--Kartikeya; sarasam--of all
reservoirs of water; asmi--I am; sagarah--the ocean.
TRANSLATION
Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Brhaspati, the lord of
devotion. Of generals I am Skanda, the lord of war; and of bodies of
water I am the ocean.
PURPORT
Indra is the chief demigod of the heavenly planets and is known as the
king of the heavens. The planet in which he reigns is called Indraloka.
Brhaspati is Indra's priest, and since Indra is the chief of all kings,
Brhaspati is the chief of all priests. And as Indra is the chief of all
kings, similarly Skanda the son of Parvati and Lord Siva, is the chief
of all military commanders. And of all bodies of water, the ocean is
the greatest. These representations of Krsna only give hints of His
greatness.
TEXT 25
maharsinam bhrgur aham
giram asmy ekam aksaram
yajnanam japa-yajno 'smi
sthavaranam himalayah
SYNONYMS
maha-rsinam--among the great sages; bhrguh--Bhrgu; aham--I am; giram--
of vibrations; asmi--I am; ekam aksaram--pranava; yajnanam--of
sacrifices; japa-yajnah--chanting; asmi--I am; sthavaranam--of
immovable things; himalayah--the Himalayan mountains.
TRANSLATION
Of the great sages I am Bhrgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental
om. Of sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and of
immovable things I am the Himalayas.
PURPORT
Brahma, the first living creature within the universe, created several
sons for the propagation of various kinds of species. The most powerful
of his sons is Bhrgu, who is also the greatest sage. Of all the
transcendental vibrations, the om (omkara) represents the Supreme. Of
all sacrifices, the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare is the purest
representation of Krsna. Sometimes animal sacrifices are recommended,
but in the sacrifice of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, there is no question of
violence. It is the simplest and the purest. Whatever is sublime in the
worlds is a representation of Krsna. Therefore the Himalayas, the
greatest mountains in the world, also represent Him. The mountain named
Meru was mentioned in a previous verse, but Meru is sometimes movable,
whereas the Himalayas are never movable. Thus the Himalayas are greater
than Meru.
TEXT 26
asvatthah sarva-vrksanam
devarsinam ca naradah
gandharvanam citrarathah
siddhanam kapilo munih
SYNONYMS
asvatthah--the banyan tree; sarva-vrksanam--of all trees; deva-rsinam--
of all the sages amongst the demigods; ca--and; naradah--Narada;
gandharvanam--the citizens of the Gandharva planet; citrarathah--
Citraratha; siddhanam--of all those who are perfected; kapilah munih--
Kapila Muni.
TRANSLATION
Of all trees I am the holy fig tree, and among sages and demigods I am
Narada. Of singers of the gods [Gandharvas] I am Citraratha, and among
perfected beings I am the sage Kapila.
PURPORT
The fig tree (asvattha) is one of the most beautiful and highest trees,
and people in India often worship it as one of their daily morning
rituals. Amongst the demigods they also worship Narada, who is
considered the greatest devotee in the universe. Thus he is the
representation of Krsna as a devotee. The Gandharva planet is filled
with entities who sing beautifully, and among them the best singer is
Citraratha. Amongst the perpetually living entities, Kapila is
considered an incarnation of Krsna, and His philosophy is mentioned in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Later on another Kapila became famous, but his
philosophy was atheistic. Thus there is a gulf of difference between
them.
TEXT 27
uccaihsravasam asvanam
viddhi mam amrtodbhavam
airavatam gajendranam
naranam ca naradhipam
SYNONYMS
uccaihsravasam--Uccaihsrava; asvanam--among horses; viddhi--know; mam--
Me; amrta-udbhavam--produced from the churning of the ocean; airavatam-
-Airavata; gaja-indranam--of elephants; naranam--among human beings;
ca--and; nara-adhipam--the king.
TRANSLATION
Of horses know Me to be Uccaihsrava, who rose out of the ocean, born of
the elixir of immortality; of lordly elephants I am Airavata, and among
men I am the monarch.
PURPORT
The devotee demigods and the demons (asuras) once took a sea journey.
On this journey, nectar and poison were produced, and Lord Siva drank
the poison. From the nectar were produced many entities, of which there
was a horse named Uccaihsrava. Another animal produced from the nectar
was an elephant named Airavata. Because these two animals were produced
from nectar, they have special significance, and they are
representatives of Krsna.
Amongst the human beings the king is the representative of Krsna
because Krsna is the maintainer of the universe, and the kings, who are
appointed on account of their godly qualifications, are maintainers of
their kingdoms. Kings like Maharaja Yudhisthira, Maharaja Pariksit and
Lord Rama were all highly righteous kings who always thought of the
citizens' welfare. In Vedic literature, the king is considered to be
the representative of God. In this age, however, with the corruption of
the principles of religion, monarchy decayed and is now finally
abolished. It is to be understood that in the past, however, people
were more happy under righteous kings.
TEXT 28
ayudhanam aham vajram
dhenunam asmi kamadhuk
prajanas casmi kandarpah
sarpanam asmi vasukih
SYNONYMS
ayudhanam--of all weapons; aham--I am; vajram--the thunderbolt;
dhenunam--of cows; asmi--I am; kama-dhuk--the surabhi cows; prajanah--
for begetting children; ca--and; asmi--I am; kandarpah--Cupid;
sarpanam--of all snakes; asmi--I am; vasukih--Vasuki.
TRANSLATION
Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi, givers of
abundant milk. Of procreators I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and of
serpents I am Vasuki, the chief.
PURPORT
The thunderbolt, indeed a mighty weapon, represents Krsna's power. In
Krsnaloka in the spiritual sky there are cows which can be milked at
any time, and they give as much milk as one likes. Of course such cows
do not exist in this material world, but there is mention of them in
Krsnaloka. The Lord keeps many such cows, which are called surabhi. It
is stated that the Lord is engaged in herding the surabhi cows.
Kandarpa is the sex desire for presenting good sons; therefore Kandarpa
is the representative of Krsna. Sometimes sex is engaged in only for
sense gratification; such sex does not represent Krsna. But sex for the
generation of good children is called Kandarpa and represents Krsna.
TEXT 29
anantas casmi naganam
varuno yadasam aham
pitrnam aryama casmi
yamah samyamatam aham
SYNONYMS
anantah--Ananta; ca--also; asmi--I am; naganam--of all serpents;
varunah--the demigod controlling the water; yadasam--of all aquatics;
aham--I am; pitrnam--of the ancestors; aryama--Aryama; ca--also; asmi--
I am; yamah--the controller of death; samyamatam--of all regulators;
aham--I am.
TRANSLATION
Of the celestial Naga snakes I am Ananta; of the aquatic deities I am
Varuna. Of departed ancestors I am Aryama, and among the dispensers of
law I am Yama, lord of death.
PURPORT
Among the many celestial Naga serpents, Ananta is the greatest, as is
Varuna among the aquatics. They both represent Krsna. There is also a
planet of Pitas, ancestors, presided over by Aryama, who represents
Krsna. There are many living entities who give punishment to the
miscreants, and among them Yama is the chief. Yama is situated in a
planet near this earthly planet, and after death those who are very
sinful are taken there, and Yama arranges different kinds of
punishments for them.
TEXT 30
prahladas casmi daityanam
kalah kalayatam aham
mrganam ca mrgendro 'ham
vainateyas ca paksinam
SYNONYMS
prahladah--Prahlada; ca--also; asmi--I am; daityanam--of the demons;
kalah--time; kalayatam--of subduers; aham--I am; mrganam--of animals;
ca--and; mrga-indrah--the lion; aham--I am; vainateyah--Garuda; ca--
also; paksinam--of birds.
TRANSLATION
Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlada; among subduers I am
time; among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuda, the
feathered carrier of Visnu.
PURPORT
Diti and Aditi are two sisters. The sons of Aditi are called Adityas,
and the sons of Diti are called Daityas. All the Adityas are devotees
of the Lord, and all the Daityas are atheistic. Although Prahlada was
born in the family of the Daityas, he was a great devotee from his
childhood. Because of his devotional service and godly nature, he is
considered to be a representative of Krsna.
There are many subduing principles, but time wears down all things in
the material universe and so represents Krsna. Of the many animals, the
lion is the most powerful and ferocious, and of the million varieties
of birds, Garuda, the bearer of Lord Visnu, is the greatest.
TEXT 31
pavanah pavatam asmi
ramah sastra-bhrtam aham
jhasanam makaras casmi
srotasam asmi jahnavi
SYNONYMS
pavanah--the wind; pavatam--of all that purifies; asmi--I am; ramah--
Rama; sastra-bhrtam--of the carriers of weapons; aham--I am; jhasanam--
of all aquatics; makarah--shark; ca asmi--I am also; srotasam--of
flowing rivers; asmi--I am; jahnavi--the River Ganges.
TRANSLATION
Of purifiers I am the wind; of the wielders of weapons I am Rama; of
fishes I am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.
PURPORT
Of all the aquatics the shark is one of the biggest and is certainly
the most dangerous to man. Thus the shark represents Krsna. And of
rivers, the greatest in India is the Mother Ganges. Lord Ramacandra, of
the Ramayana, an incarnation of Krsna, is the mightest of warriors.
TEXT 32
sarganam adir antas ca
madhyam caivaham arjuna
adhyatma-vidya vidyanam
vadah pravadatam aham
SYNONYMS
sarganam--of all creations; adih--beginning; antah--end; ca--and;
madhyam--middle; ca--also; eva--certainly; aham--I am; arjuna--O
Arjuna; 
adhyatma-vidya--spiritual 
knowledge; 
vidyanam--of 
all
education; vadah--natural conclusion; pravadatam--of arguments; aham--I
am.
TRANSLATION
Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O
Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and
among logicians I am the conclusive truth.
PURPORT
Among created manifestations, the total material elements are first
created by Maha-Visnu and are annihilated by Lord Siva. Brahma is a
secondary creator. All these created elements are different
incarnations of the material qualities of the Supreme Lord; therefore
He is the beginning, the middle and the end of all creation.
Regarding the spiritual science of the self, there are many
literatures, such as the four Vedas, the Vedanta-sutra and the Puranas,
the Srimad Bhagavatam and the Gita. These are all representatives of
Krsna. Among logicians there are different stages of argument. The
presentation of evidence is called jalpa. The attempt to defeat one
another is called vitanda, and the final conclusion is called vada. The
conclusive truth, the end of all reasoning processes, is Krsna.
TEXT 33
aksaranam akaro 'smi
dvandvah samasikasya ca
aham evaksayah kalo
dhataham visvato-mukhah
SYNONYMS
aksaranam--of letters; akarah--the first; asmi--I am; dvandvah--dual;
samasikasya--compounds; ca--and; aham--I am; eva--certainly; aksayah--
eternal; kalah--time; dhata--creator; aham--I am; visvatah-mukhah--
Brahma.
TRANSLATION
Of letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual
compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahma,
whose manifold faces turn everywhere.
PURPORT
Akara, the first letter of the Sanskrit alphabet, is the beginning of
the Vedic literature. Without akara, nothing can be sounded; therefore
it is the beginning of sound. In Sanskrit there are also many compound
words, of which the dual word, like Rama-krsna, is called dvandva. For
instance, Rama and Krsna have the same rhythm, and therefore are called
dual.
Among all kinds of killers, time is the ultimate because time kills
everything. Time is the representative of Krsna because in due course
of time there will be a great fire and everything will be annihilated.
Among the creators and living entities, Brahma is the chief. The
various Brahma's exhibit four, eight, sixteen, etc., heads accordingly,
and they are the chief creators in their respective universes. The
Brahmas are representatives of Krsna.
TEXT 34
mrtyuh sarva-haras caham
udbhavas ca bhavisyatam
kirtih srir vak ca narinam
smrtir medha dhrtih ksama
SYNONYMS
mrtyuh--death; sarva-harah--all-devouring; ca--also; aham--I am;
udbhavah--generation; ca--also; bhavisyatam--of the future; kirtih--
fame; srih vak--beautiful speech; ca--also; narinam--of women; smrtih--
memory; medha--intelligence; dhrtih--faithfulness; ksama--patience.
TRANSLATION
I am all-devouring death, and I am the generator of all things yet to
be. Among women I am fame, fortune, speech, memory, intelligence,
faithfulness and patience.
PURPORT
As soon as a man is born, he dies at every moment. Thus death is
devouring every living entity at every moment, but the last stroke is
called death itself. That death is Krsna. All species of life undergo
six basic changes. They are born, they grow, they remain for some time,
they reproduce, they dwindle and finally they vanish. Of these changes,
the first is deliverance from the womb, and that is Krsna. The first
generation is the beginning of all future activities.
The seven opulences listed are considered to be feminine. If a woman
possesses all of them or some of them she becomes glorious. Sanskrit is
a perfect language and is therefore very glorious. After studying, if
one can remember the subject matter, he is gifted with a good memory,
or smrti. One need not read many books on different subject matters;
the ability to remember a few and quote them when necessary is another
opulence.
TEXT 35
brhat-sama tatha samnam
gayatri chandasam aham
masanam marga-sirso 'ham
rtunam kusumakarah
SYNONYMS
brhat-sama--the Brhat-sama; tatha--also; samnam--of the Sama Veda
songs; gayatri--the Gayatri hymns; chandasam--of all poetry; aham--I
am; masanam--of months; marga-sirsah--the month of November-December;
aham--I am; rtunam--of all seasons; kusuma-akarah--spring.
TRANSLATION
Of hymns I am the Brhat-sama sung to the Lord Indra, and of poetry I am
the Gayatri verse, sung daily by Brahmanas. Of months I am November and
December, and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.
PURPORT
It has already been explained by the Lord that amongst all the Vedas,
the Sama Veda is rich with beautiful songs played by the various
demigods. One of these songs is the Brhat-sama, which has an exquisite
melody and is sung at midnight.
In Sanskrit there are definite rules that regulate poetry; rhyme and
meter are not written whimsically, as in much modern poetry. Amongst
the regulated poetry, the Gayatri mantra, which is chanted by the duly
qualified brahmanas, is the most prominent. The Gayatri mantra is
mentioned in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Because the Gayatri mantra is
especially meant for God realization, it represents the Supreme Lord.
This mantra is meant for spiritually advanced people, and when one
attains success in chanting it, he can enter into the transcendental
position of the Lord. One must first acquire the qualities of the
perfectly situated person, the qualities of goodness according to the
laws of material nature, in order to chant the Gayatri mantra. The
Gayatri mantra is very important in Vedic civilization and is
considered to be the sound incarnation of Brahman. Brahma is its
initiator, and it is passed down from him in disciplic succession.
The months of November and December are considered the best of all
months because in India grains are collected from the fields at this
time, and the people become very happy. Of course spring is a season
universally liked because it is neither too hot nor too cold, and the
flowers and trees blossom and flourish. In spring there are also many
ceremonies commemorating Krsna's pastimes; therefore this is considered
to be the most joyful of all seasons, and it is the representative of
the Supreme Lord, Krsna.
TEXT 36
dyutam chalayatam asmi
tejas tejasvinam aham
jayo 'smi vyavasayo 'smi
sattvam sattvavatam aham
SYNONYMS
dyutam--gambling; chalayatam--of all cheats; asmi--I am; tejah--
splendid; tejasvinam--of everything splendid; aham--I am; jayah--
victory; asmi--I am; vyavasayah--adventure; asmi--I am; sattvam--
strength; sattva-vatam--of all the strong; aham--I am.
TRANSLATION
I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the
splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of the
strong.
PURPORT
There are many kinds of cheaters all over the universe. Of all cheating
processes, gambling stands supreme and therefore represents Krsna. As
the Supreme, Krsna can be more deceitful than any mere man. If Krsna
chooses to deceive a person, no one can surpass Him in His deceit. His
greatness is not simply one-sided--it is all-sided.
Among the victorious, He is victory. He is the splendor of the
splendid. Among enterprising industrialists, He is the most
enterprising, the most industrious. Among adventurers, He is the most
adventurous, and among the strong He is the strongest. When Krsna was
present on earth, no one could surpass Him in strength. Even in His
childhood He lifted Govardhana Hill. No one can surpass Him in
cheating, no one can surpass Him in splendor, no one can surpass Him in
victory, no one can surpass Him in enterprise, and no one can surpass
Him in strength.
TEXT 37
vrsninam vasudevo 'smi
pandavanam dhananjayah
muninam apy aham vyasah
kavinam usana kavih
SYNONYMS
vrsninam--of the descendants of Vrsni; vasudevah--Krsna in Dvaraka;
asmi--I am; pandavanam--of the Pandavas; dhananjayah--Arjuna; muninam--
of the sages; api--also; aham--I am; vyasah--Vyasa, the compiler of all
Vedic literature; kavinam--of all great thinkers; usana--Usana; kavih--
the thinker.
TRANSLATION
Of the descendants of Vrsni I am Vasudeva, and of the Pandavas I am
Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyasa, and among great thinkers I am Usana.
PURPORT
Krsna is the original Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Vasudeva is
the immediate expansion of Krsna. Both Lord Krsna and Baladeva appear
as the sons of Vasudeva. Amongst the sons of Pandu, Arjuna is famous
and valiant. Indeed, He is the best of men and therefore represents
Krsna. Among the munis, or learned men conversant in Vedic knowledge,
Vyasa is the greatest because he explained Vedic knowledge in many
different ways for the understanding of the common mass of people in
this Age of Kali. And Vyasa is also known as an incarnation of Krsna;
therefore Vyasa also represents Krsna. Kavis are those who are capable
of thinking thoroughly on any subject matter. Among the kavis, Usana
was the spiritual master of the demons; he was an extremely
intelligent, far-seeing, political and spiritual in every way. Thus
Usana is another representative of the opulence of Krsna.
TEXT 38
dando damayatam asmi
nitir asmi jigisatam
maunam caivasmi guhyanam
jnanam jnanavatam aham
SYNONYMS
dandah--punishment; damayatam--of all separation; asmi--I am; nitih--
morality; asmi--I am; jigisatam--of the victorious; maunam--silence;
ca--and; eva--also; asmi--I am; guhyanam--of secrets; jnanam--
knowledge; jnana-vatam--of the wise; aham--I am.
TRANSLATION
Among punishments I am the rod of chastisement, and of those who seek
victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I
am wisdom.
PURPORT
There are many suppressing agents, of which the most important are
those that cut down the miscreants. When miscreants are punished, the
rod of chastisement represents Krsna. Among those who are trying to be
victorious in some field of activity, the most victorious element is
morality. Among the confidential activities of hearing, thinking and
meditating, silence is most important because by silence one can make
progress very quickly. The wise man is he who can discriminate between
matter and spirit, between God's superior and inferior natures. Such
knowledge is Krsna Himself.
TEXT 39
yac capi sarva-bhutanam
bijam tad aham arjuna
na tad asti vina yat syan
maya bhutam caracaram
SYNONYMS
yat--whatever; ca--also; api--may be; sarva-bhutanam--of all creations;
bijam--the seed; tat--that; aham--I am; arjuna--O Arjuna; na--not; tat-
-that; asti--there is; vina--without; yat--that; syat--exists; maya--by
Me; bhutam--created; cara-acaram--moving and unmoving.
TRANSLATION
Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences.
There is no being--moving or unmoving--that can exist without Me.
PURPORT
Everything has a cause, and that cause or seed of manifestation is
Krsna. Without Krsna's energy, nothing can exist; therefore He is
called omnipotent. Without His potency, neither the movable nor the
unmovable can exist. Whatever existence is not founded on the energy of
Krsna is called maya, that which is not.
TEXT 40
nanto 'sti mama divyanam
vibhutinam parantapa
esa tuddesatah prokto
vibhuter vistaro maya
SYNONYMS
na--nor; antah--a limit; asti--is there; mama--My; divyanam--divine;
vibhutinam--opulences; parantapa--O conqueror of the enemies; esah--all
this; tu--that; uddesatah--examples; proktah--spoken; vibhuteh--
opulences; vistarah--expanded; maya--by Me.
TRANSLATION
O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine
manifestations. What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication of
My infinite opulences.
PURPORT
As stated in the Vedic literature, although the opulences and energies
of the Supreme are understood in various ways, there is no limit to
such opulences; therefore not all the opulences and energies can be
explained. Simply a few examples are being described to Arjuna to
pacify his inquisitiveness.
TEXT 41
yad yad vibhutimat sattvam
srimad urjitam eva va
tat tad evavagaccha tvam
mama tejo-'msa-sambhavam
SYNONYMS
yat yat--whatever; vibhuti--opulences; mat--having; sattvam--existence;
sri-mat--beautiful; urjitam--glorious; eva--certainly; va--or; tat tat-
-all those; eva--certainly; avagaccha--you must know; tvam--you; mama--
My; tejah--splendor; amsa--partly; sambhavam--born of.
TRANSLATION
Know that all beautiful, glorious, and mighty creations spring from but
a spark of My splendor.
PURPORT
Any glorious or beautiful existence should be understood to be but a
fragmental manifestation of Krsna's opulence, whether it be in the
spiritual or material world. Anything extraordinarily opulent should be
considered to represent Krsna's opulence.
TEXT 42
atha va bahunaitena
kim jnatena tavarjuna
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam
ekamsena sthito jagat
SYNONYMS
atha va--or; bahuna--many; etena--by this kind; kim--what; jnatena--
knowing; tava--you; arjuna--O Arjuna; vistabhya--entire; aham--I; idam-
-this; krtsnam--of all manifestations; eka--one; amsena--part; sthitah-
-situated; jagat--in the universe.
TRANSLATION
But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a
single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.
PURPORT
The Supreme Lord is represented throughout the entire material
universes by His entering into all things as the Supersoul. The Lord
here tells Arjuna that there is no point in understanding how things
exist in their separate opulence and grandeur. He should know that all
things are existing due to Krsna's entering them as Supersoul. From
Brahma, the most gigantic entity, on down to the smallest ant, all are
existing because the Lord has entered each and all and is sustaining
them.
Worship of demigods is discouraged herein because even the greatest
demigods like Brahma and Siva only represent part of the opulence of
the Supreme Lord. He is the origin of everyone born, and no one is
greater than Him. He is asamaurdhva, which means that no one is
superior to Him and that no one is equal to Him. In the Padma Purana it
is said that one who considers the Supreme Lord Krsna in the same
category with demigods--be they even Brahma or Siva--becomes at once an
atheist. If, however, one thoroughly studies the different descriptions
of the opulences and expansions of Krsna's energy, then one can
understand without any doubt the position of Lord Sri Krsna and can fix
his mind in the worship of Krsna without deviation. The Lord is all-
pervading by the expansion of His partial representation, the
Supersoul, who enters into everything that is. Pure devotees,
therefore, concentrate their minds in Krsna consciousness in full
devotional service; therefore they are always situated in the
transcendental position. Devotional service and worship of Krsna are
very clearly indicated in this chapter in verses eight through eleven.
That is the way of pure devotional service. How one can attain the
highest devotional perfection of association with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead has been thoroughly explained in this chapter.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Tenth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Opulence of the Absolute.