Chapter 18
Conclusion--The Perfection of Renunciation
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
sannyasasya maha-baho
tattvam icchami veditum
tyagasya ca hrsikesa
prthak kesi-nisudana
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sannyasasya--renunciation; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; tattvam--truth; icchami--I wish; veditum--to
understand; tyagasya--of renunciation; ca--also; hrsikesa--O master of
the senses; prthak--differently; kesi-nisudana--O killer of the Kesi
demon.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said, O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of
renunciation [tyaga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyasa], O
killer of the Kesi demon, Hrsikesa.
PURPORT
Actually the Bhagavad-gita is finished in seventeen chapters. The
Eighteenth Chapter is a supplementary summarization of the topics
discussed before. In every chapter of Bhagavad-gita, Lord Krsna
stresses that devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the ultimate goal of life. This same point is summarized in
the Eighteenth Chapter as the most confidential path of knowledge. In
the first six chapters, stress was given to devotional service: yoginam
api sarvesam... "Of all yogis or transcendentalists, one who always
thinks of Me within himself is best." In the next six chapters, pure
devotional service and its nature and activity were discussed. In the
third six chapters, knowledge, renunciation, the activities of material
nature and transcendental nature, and devotional service were
described. It was concluded that all acts should be performed in
conjunction with the Supreme Lord, summarized by the words om tat sat,
which indicate Visnu, the Supreme Person. In the third part of
Bhagavad-gita, devotional service was established by the example of
past acaryas and the Brahma-sutra, the Vedanta-sutra, which cites that
devotional service is the ultimate purpose of life and nothing else.
Certain impersonalists consider themselves monopolizers of the
knowledge of Vedanta-sutra, but actually the Vedanta-sutra is meant for
understanding devotional service, for the Lord Himself is the composer
of the Vedanta-sutra, and He is its knower. That is described in the
Fifteenth Chapter. In every scripture, every Veda, devotional service
is the objective. That is explained in Bhagavad-gita.
As in the Second Chapter a synopsis of the whole subject matter was
described, similarly, in the Eighteenth Chapter also the summary of all
instruction is given. The purpose of life is indicated to be
renunciation and attainment of the transcendental position above the
three material modes of nature. Arjuna wants to clarify the two
distinct subject matters of Bhagavad-gita, namely renunciation (tyaga)
and the renounced order of life (sannyasa). Thus he is asking the
meaning of these two words.
Two words used in this verse to address the Supreme Lord--Hrsikesa and
Kesi-nisudana--are significant. Hrsikesa is Krsna, the master of all
senses, who can always help us attain mental serenity. Arjuna requests
Him to summarize everything in such a way that he can remain
equipoised. Yet he has some doubts, and doubts are always compared to
demons. He therefore addresses Krsna as Kesi-nisudana. Kesi was a most
formidable demon who was killed by the Lord; now Arjuna is expecting
Krsna to kill the demon of doubt.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kamyanam karmanam nyasam
sannyasam kavayo viduh
sarva-karma-phala-tyagam
prahus tyagam vicaksanah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kamyanam--
with desire; karmanam--activities; nyasam--renunciation; sannyasam--
renounced order of life; kavayah--the learned; viduh--know; sarva--of
all; karma--activities; phala--of results; tyagam--renunciation;
prahuh--call; tyagam--renunciation; vicaksanah--the experienced.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord said, to give up the results of all activities is
called renunciation [tyaga] by the wise. And that state is called the
renounced order of life [sannyasa] by great learned men.
PURPORT
The performance of activities for results has to be given up. This is
the instruction of Bhagavad-gita. But activities leading to advanced
spiritual knowledge are not to be given up. This will be made clear in
the next verse. There are many prescriptions of methods for performing
sacrifice for some particular purpose in the Vedic literatures. There
are certain sacrifices to perform to attain a good son or to attain
elevation to the higher planets, but sacrifices prompted by desires
should be stopped. However, sacrifice for the purification of one's
heart or for advancement in the spiritual science should not be given
up.
TEXT 3
tyajyam dosa-vad ity eke
karma prahur manisinah
yajna-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam iti capare
SYNONYMS
tyajyam--must be given up; dosa-vat--as an evil; iti--thus; eke--one
group; karma--work; prahuh--said; manisinah--of great thinkers; yajna--
sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--work; na--never;
tyajyam--is to be given up; iti--thus; ca--certainly; apare--others.
TRANSLATION
Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should
be given up, but there are yet other sages who maintain that acts of
sacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.
PURPORT
There are many activities in the Vedic literatures which are subjects
of contention. For instance, it is said that an animal can be killed in
a sacrifice, yet some maintain animal killing is completely abominable.
Although animal killing in a sacrifice is recommended in the Vedic
literature, the animal is not considered to be killed. The sacrifice is
to give a new life to the animal. Sometimes the animal is given a new
animal life after being killed in the sacrifice, and sometimes the
animal is promoted immediately to the human form of life. But there are
different opinions among the sages. Some say that animal killing should
always be avoided, and others say that for a specific sacrifice it is
good. All these different opinions on sacrificial activity are now
being clarified by the Lord Himself.
TEXT 4
niscayam srnu me tatra
tyage bharata-sattama
tyago hi purusa-vyaghra
tri-vidhah samprakirtitah
SYNONYMS
niscayam--certainty; srnu--hear; me--from Me; tatra--there; tyage--in
the matter of renunciation; bharata-sat-tama--O best of the Bharatas;
tyagah--renunciation; hi--certainly; purusa-vyaghra--O tiger among
human beings; tri-vidhah--three kinds; samprakirtitah--is declared.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bharatas, hear from Me now about renunciation. O tiger
among men, there are three kinds of renunciation declared in the
scriptures.
PURPORT
Although there are differences of opinion about renunciation, here the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, gives His judgment, which
should be taken as final. After all, the Vedas are different laws given
by the Lord. Here the Lord is personally present, and His word should
be taken as final. The Lord says that the process of renunciation
should be considered in terms of the modes of material nature in which
they are performed.
TEXT 5
yajna-dana-tapah-karma
na tyajyam karyam eva tat
yajno danam tapas caiva
pavanani manisinam
SYNONYMS
yajna--sacrifice; dana--charity; tapah--penance; karma--activities; na-
-never; tyajyam--to be given up; karyam--must be done; eva--certainly;
tat--that; yajnah--sacrifice; danam--charity; tapah--penance; ca--also;
eva--certainly; pavanani--purifying; manisinam--even of the great
souls.
TRANSLATION
Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up but
should be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even
the great souls.
PURPORT
The yogis should perform acts for the advancement of human society.
There are many purificatory processes for advancing a human being to
spiritual life. The marriage ceremony, for example, is considered to be
one of these sacrifices. It is called vivaha-yajna. Should a sannyasi,
who is in the renounced order of life and who has given up his family
relations, encourage the marriage ceremony? The Lord says here that any
sacrifice which is meant for human welfare should never be given up.
Vivaha-yajna, the marriage ceremony, is meant to regulate the human
mind to become peaceful for spiritual advancement. For most men, this
vivaha-yajna should be encouraged even by persons in the renounced
order of life. Sannyasis should never associate with women, but that
does not mean that one who is in the lower stages of life, a young man,
should not accept a wife in the marriage ceremony. All prescribed
sacrifices are meant for achieving the Supreme Lord. Therefore, in the
lower stages, they should not be given up. Similarly, charity is for
the purification of the heart. If charity is given to suitable persons,
as described previously, it leads one to advanced spiritual life.
TEXT 6
etany api tu karmani
sangam tyaktva phalani ca
kartavyaniti me partha
niscitam matam uttamam
SYNONYMS
etani--all this; api--certainly; tu--must; karmani--activities; sangam-
-association; 
tyaktva--renouncing; 
phalani--results; 
ca--also;
kartavyani--as duty; iti--thus; me--My; partha--O son of Prtha;
niscitam--definite; matam--opinion; uttamam--the best.
TRANSLATION
All these activities should be performed without any expectation of
result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Prtha.
That is My final opinion.
PURPORT
Although all sacrifices are purifying, one should not expect any result
by such performances. In other words, all sacrifices which are meant
for material advancement in life should be given up, but sacrifices
that purify one's existence and elevate one to the spiritual plane
should not be stopped. Everything that leads to Krsna consciousness
must be encouraged. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam also it is said that any
activity which leads to devotional service to the Lord should be
accepted. That is the highest criterion of religion. A devotee of the
Lord should accept any kind of work, sacrifice or charity which will
help him in the discharge of devotional service to the Lord.
TEXT 7
niyatasya tu sannyasah
karmano nopapadyate
mohat tasya parityagas
tamasah parikirtitah
SYNONYMS
niyatasya--prescribed duties; tu--but; sannyasah--renunciation;
karmanah--activities; na--never; upapadyate--is deserved; mohat--by
illusion; tasya--of which; parityagah--renunciation; tamasah--in the
mode of ignorance; parikirtitah--is declared.
TRANSLATION
Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If, by illusion, one gives
up his prescribed duties, such renunciation is said to be in the mode
of ignorance.
PURPORT
Work for material satisfaction must be given up, but activities which
promote one to spiritual activity, like cooking for the Supreme Lord
and offering the food to the Lord and then accepting the food, are
recommended. It is said that a person in the renounced order of life
should not cook for himself. Cooking for oneself is prohibited, but
cooking for the Supreme Lord is not prohibited. Similarly, a sannyasi
may perform a marriage ceremony to help his disciple in the advancement
of Krsna consciousness. If one renounces such activities, it is to be
understood that he is acting in the mode of darkness.
TEXT 8
duhkham ity eva yat karma
kaya-klesa-bhayat tyajet
sa krtva rajasam tyagam
naiva tyaga-phalam labhet
SYNONYMS
duhkham--unhappy; iti--thus; eva--certainly; yat--that which; karma--
work; kaya--body; klesa--troublesome; bhayat--out of fear; tyajet--
gives up; sah--that; krtva--after doing; rajasam--in the mode of
passion; tyagam--renunciation; na eva--certainly not; tyaga--renounced;
phalam--results; labhet--gain.
TRANSLATION
Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome, or out of fear,
is said to be in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the
elevation of renunciation.
PURPORT
One who is in Krsna consciousness should not give up earning money out
of fear that he is performing fruitive activities. If by working one
can engage his money in Krsna consciousness, or if by rising early in
the morning one can advance his transcendental Krsna consciousness, one
should not desist out of fear or because such activities are considered
troublesome. Such renunciation is in the mode of passion. The result of
passionate work is always miserable. Even if a person renounces work in
that spirit, he never gets the result of renunciation.
TEXT 9
karyam ity eva yat karma
niyatam kriyate 'rjuna
sangam tyaktva phalam caiva
sa tyagah sattviko matah
SYNONYMS
karyam--must be done; iti--thus; eva--thus; yat--that which; karma--
work; niyatam--prescribed; kriyate--performed; arjuna--O Arjuna;
sangam--association; tyaktva--giving up; phalam--result; ca--also; eva-
-certainly; sah--that; tyagah--renunciation; sattvikah--in the mode of
goodness; matah--in My opinion.
TRANSLATION
But he who performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be
done, and renounces all attachment to the fruit--his renunciation is of
the nature of goodness, O Arjuna.
PURPORT
Prescribed duties must be performed with this mentality. One should act
without attachment for the result; he should be disassociated from the
modes of work. A man working in Krsna consciousness in a factory does
not associate himself with the work of the factory, nor with the
workers of the factory. He simply works for Krsna. And when he gives up
the result for Krsna, he is acting transcendentally.
TEXT 10
na dvesty akusalam karma
kusale nanusajjate
tyagi sattva-samavisto
medhavi chinna-samsayah
SYNONYMS
na--never; dvesti--hates; akusalam--inauspicious; karma--work; kusale--
in the auspicious; na--nor; anusajjate--becomes attached; tyagi--the
renouncer; sattva--goodness; samavistah--absorbed in; medhavi--
intelligent; chinna--cut up; samsayah--all doubts.
TRANSLATION
Those who are situated in the mode of goodness, who neither hate
inauspicious work nor are attached to auspicious work, have no doubts
about work.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness or in the mode of goodness does not
hate anyone or anything which troubles his body. He does work in the
proper place and at the proper time without fearing the troublesome
effects of his duty. Such a person situated in transcendence should be
understood to be most intelligent and beyond all doubts in his
activities.
TEXT 11
na hi deha-bhrta sakyam
tyaktum karmany asesatah
yas tu karma-phala-tyagi
sa tyagity abhidhiyate
SYNONYMS
na--never; hi--certainly; deha-bhrta--of the embodied; sakyam--
possible; tyaktum--to renounce; karmani--activities of; asesatah--
altogether; yah tu--anyone who; karma--work; phala--results; tyagi--
renouncer; sah--he; tyagi--the renouncer; iti--thus; abhidhiyate--it is
said.
TRANSLATION
It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all
activities. Therefore it is said that he who renounces the fruits of
action is one who has truly renounced.
PURPORT
It is said in Bhagavad-gita that one can never give up work at any
time. Therefore he who works for Krsna and does not enjoy the fruitive
results, who offers everything to Krsna, is actually a renouncer. There
are many members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
who work very hard in their office or in the factory or some other
place, and whatever they earn they give to the Society. Such highly
elevated souls are actually sannyasis and are situated in the renounced
order of life. It is clearly outlined here how to renounce the fruits
of work and for what purpose fruits should be renounced.
TEXT 12
anistam istam misram ca
tri-vidham karmanah phalam
bhavaty atyaginam pretya
na tu sannyasinam kvacit
SYNONYMS
anistam--leading to hell; istam--leading to heaven; misram ca--or
mixture; tri-vidham--three kinds; karmanah--work; phalam--result;
bhavati--becomes; atyaginam--of the renouncer; pretya--after death; na
tu--but not; sannyasinam--of the renounced order; kvacit--at any time.
TRANSLATION
For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action--
desirable, undesirable and mixed--accrue after death. But those who are
in the renounced order of life have no such results to suffer or enjoy.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness acting in knowledge of his relationship
with Krsna is always liberated. Therefore he does not have to enjoy or
suffer the results of his acts after death.
TEXT 13
pancaitani maha-baho
karanani nibodha me
sankhye krtante proktani
siddhaye sarva-karmanam
adhisthanam tatha karta
karanam ca prthag-vidham
vividhas ca prthak cesta
daivam caivatra pancamam
SYNONYMS
panca--five; etani--all these; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; karanani-
-cause; nibodha--just understand; me--from Me; sankhye--in the Vedas;
krta-ante--after performance; proktani--said; siddhaye--perfection;
sarva--all; karmanam--actuated. adhisthanam--place; tatha--also; karta-
-worker; karanam ca--and instruments; prthak-vidham--different kinds;
vividhah ca--varieties; prthak--separately; cestah--endeavor; daivam--
the Supreme; ca--also; eva--certainly; atra--here; pancamam--five.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed Arjuna, learn from Me of the five factors which bring
about the accomplishment of all action. These are declared in sankhya
philosophy to be the place of action, the performer, the senses, the
endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul.
PURPORT
A question may be raised that since any activity performed must have
some reaction, how is it that the person in Krsna consciousness does
not suffer or enjoy the reactions of work? The Lord is citing Vedanta
philosophy to show how this is possible. He says that there are five
causes for all activities, and for success in all activity, one should
know these five causes. Sankhya means the stalk of knowledge, and
Vedanta is the final stalk of knowledge accepted by all leading
acaryas. Even Sankara accepts Vedanta-sutra as such. Therefore such
authority should be consulted.
The ultimate will is invested in the Supersoul, as it is stated in the
Gita, sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah. He is engaging everyone in
certain activities. Acts done under His direction from within yield no
reaction, either in this life or in the life after death.
The instruments of action are the senses, and by senses the soul acts
in various ways, and for each and every action there is a different
endeavor. But all one's activities depend on the will of the Supersoul,
who is seated within the heart as a friend. The Supreme Lord is the
supercause. Under these circumstances, he who is acting in Krsna
consciousness under the direction of the Supersoul situated within the
heart is naturally not bound by any activity. Those in complete Krsna
consciousness are not ultimately responsible for their actions.
Everything is dependent on the supreme will, the Supersoul, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 15
sarira-van-manobhir yat
karma prarabhate narah
nyayyam va viparitam va
pancaite tasya hetavah
SYNONYMS
sarira--body; vak--speech; manobhih--by the mind; yat--anything; karma-
-work; prarabhate--begins; narah--a person; nyayyam--right; va--or;
viparitam--the opposite; va--or; panca--five; ete--all these; tasya--
its; hetavah--causes.
TRANSLATION
Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech
is caused by these five factors.
PURPORT
The words "right" and "wrong" are very significant in this verse. Right
work is work done in terms of the prescribed directions in the
scriptures, and wrong work is work done against the principles of the
scriptural injunctions. But whatever is done requires these five
factors for its complete performance.
TEXT 16
tatraivam sati kartaram
atmanam kevalam tu yah
pasyaty akrta-buddhitvan
na sa pasyati durmatih
SYNONYMS
tatra--there; evam--certainly; sati--being; kartaram--of the worker;
atmanam--the self; kevalam--only; tu--but; yah--anyone; pasyati--sees;
akrta-buddhitvat--due to unintelligence; na--never; sah--he; pasyati--
sees; durmatih--foolish.
TRANSLATION
Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the
five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things
as they are.
PURPORT
A foolish person cannot understand that the Supersoul is sitting as a
friend within and conducting his actions. Although the material causes
are the place, the worker, the endeavor and the senses, the final cause
is the Supreme, the Personality of Godhead. Therefore, one should see
not only the four material causes, but the supreme efficient cause as
well. One who does not see the Supreme thinks himself to be the doer.
TEXT 17
yasya nahankrto bhavo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatvapi sa imal lokan
na hanti na nibadhyate
SYNONYMS
yasya--of one who; na--never; ahankrtah--false ego; bhavah--nature;
buddhih--intelligence; yasya--one who; na--never; lipyate--is attached;
hatva api--even killing; sah--he; iman--this; lokan--world; na--never;
hanti--kills; na--never; nibadhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not
entangled, though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor is
he bound by his actions.
PURPORT
In this verse the Lord informs Arjuna that the desire not to fight
arises from false ego. Arjuna thought himself to be the doer of action,
but he did not consider the supreme sanction within and without. If one
does not know that a supersanction is there, why should he act? But one
who knows the instrument of work, himself as the worker, and the
Supreme Lord as the supreme sanctioner is perfect in doing everything.
Such a person is never in illusion. Personal activity and
responsibility arise from false ego and godlessness, or a lack of Krsna
consciousness. Anyone who is acting in Krsna consciousness under the
direction of the Supersoul or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even
though killing, does not kill. Nor is he ever affected with the
reaction of such killing. When a soldier kills under the command of a
superior officer, he is not subject to be judged. But if a soldier
kills on his own personal account, then he is certainly judged by a
court of law.
TEXT 18
jnanam jneyam parijnata
tri-vidha karma-codana
karanam karma karteti
tri-vidhah karma-sangrahah
SYNONYMS
jnanam--knowledge; jneyam--objective; parijnata--the knower; tri-vidha-
-three kinds; karma--work; codana--impetus; karanam--the senses; karma-
-work; karta--the doer; iti--thus; tri-vidhah--three kinds; karma--
work; sangrahah--accumulation.
TRANSLATION
Knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower are the three factors
which motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer comprise the
threefold basis of action.
PURPORT
There are three kinds of impetus for daily work: knowledge, the object
of knowledge and the knower. The instruments of work, the work itself
and the worker are called the constituents of work. Any work done by
any human being has these elements. Before one acts, there is some
impetus, which is called inspiration. Any solution arrived at before
work is actualized is a subtle form of work. Then work takes the form
of action. First one has to undergo the psychological processes of
thinking, feeling and willing, and that is called impetus. Actually the
faith to perform acts is called knowledge. The inspiration to work is
the same if it comes from the scripture or from the instruction of the
spiritual master. When the inspiration is there and the worker is
there, then actual activity takes place by the help of the senses. The
mind is the center of all senses, and the object is work itself. These
are the different phases of work as described in Bhagavad-gita. The sum
total of all activities is called accumulation of work.
TEXT 19
jnanam karma ca karta ca
tridhaiva guna-bhedatah
procyate guna-sankhyane
yathavac chrnu tany api
SYNONYMS
jnanam--knowledge; karma--work; ca--also; karta--worker; ca--also;
tridha--three kinds; eva--certainly; guna-bhedatah--in terms of
different modes of material nature; procyate--is said; guna-sankhyane--
in terms of different modes; yatha-vat--as they act; srnu--hear; tani--
all of them; api--also.
TRANSLATION
In accordance with the three modes of material nature, there are three
kinds of knowledge, action, and performers of action. Listen as I
describe them.
PURPORT
In the Fourteenth Chapter the three divisions of the modes of material
nature were elaborately described. In that chapter it was said that the
mode of goodness is illuminating, the mode of passion materialistic,
and the mode of ignorance conducive to laziness and indolence. All the
modes of material nature are binding; they are not sources of
liberation. Even in the mode of goodness one is conditioned. In the
Seventeenth Chapter, the different types of worship by different types
of men in different modes of material nature were described. In this
verse, the Lord wishes to speak about the different types of knowledge,
workers, and work itself according to the three material modes.
TEXT 20
sarva-bhutesu yenaikam
bhavam avyayam iksate
avibhaktam vibhaktesu
taj jnanam viddhi sattvikam
SYNONYMS
sarva-bhutesu--in all living entities; yena--by whom; ekam--one;
bhavam--situation; avyayam--imperishable; iksate--does see; avibhaktam-
-undivided; vibhaktesu--in the numberless divided; tat--that; jnanam--
knowledge; viddhi--know; sattvikam--in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all
existences, undivided in the divided, is knowledge in the mode of
goodness.
PURPORT
A person who sees one spirit soul in every living being, whether a
demigod, human being, animal, bird, beast, aquatic or plant, possesses
knowledge in the mode of goodness. In all living entities, one spirit
soul is there, although they have different bodies in terms of their
previous work. As described in the Seventh Chapter, the manifestation
of the living force in every body is due to the superior nature of the
Supreme Lord. Thus to see that one superior nature, that living force,
in every body is to see in the mode of goodness. That living energy is
imperishable, although the bodies are perishable. The difference is
perceived in terms of the body because there are many forms of material
existence in conditional life; therefore they appear to be divided.
Such impersonal knowledge finally leads to self-realization.
TEXT 21
prthaktvena tu yaj jnanam
nana-bhavan prthag-vidhan
vetti sarvesu bhutesu
taj jnanam viddhi rajasam
SYNONYMS
prthaktvena--because of division; tu--but; yat jnanam--which knowledge;
nana-bhavan--multifarious situations; prthak-vidhan--differently;
vetti--one who knows; sarvesu--in all; bhutesu--living entities; tat
jnanam--that knowledge; viddhi--must be known; rajasam--in terms of
passion.
TRANSLATION
That knowledge by which a different type of living entity is seen to be
dwelling in different bodies is knowledge in the mode of passion.
PURPORT
The concept that the material body is the living entity and that with
the destruction of the body the consciousness is also destroyed is
called knowledge in the mode of passion. According to that knowledge,
bodies differ from one another because of the development of different
types of consciousness, otherwise there is no separate soul which
manifests consciousness. The body is itself the soul, and there is no
separate soul beyond the body. According to such knowledge,
consciousness is temporary. Or else there are no individual souls, but
there is an all-pervading soul, which is full of knowledge, and this
body is a manifestation of temporary ignorance. Or beyond this body
there is no special individual or supreme soul. All such conceptions
are considered products of the mode of passion.
TEXT 22
yat tu krtsna-vad ekasmin
karye saktam ahaitukam
atattvartha-vad alpam ca
tat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMS
yat--that which; tu--but; krtsna-vat--all in all; ekasmin--in one;
karye--work; saktam--attached; ahaitukam--without cause; atattva-artha-
vat--without reality; alpam--very meager; ca--and; tat--that; tamasam--
in the mode of darkness; udahrtam--is spoken.
TRANSLATION
And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the
all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager,
is said to be in the mode of darkness.
PURPORT
The "knowledge" of the common man is always in the mode of darkness or
ignorance because every living entity in conditional life is born into
the mode of ignorance. One who does not develop knowledge through the
authorities or scriptural injunctions has knowledge that is limited to
the body. He is not concerned about acting in terms of the directions
of scripture. For him God is money, and knowledge means the
satisfaction of bodily demands. Such knowledge has no connection with
the Absolute Truth. It is more or less like the knowledge of the
ordinary animals: the knowledge of eating, sleeping, defending and
mating. Such knowledge is described here as the product of the mode of
darkness. In other words, knowledge concerning the spirit soul beyond
this body is called knowledge in the mode of goodness, and knowledge
producing many theories and doctrines by dint of mundane logic and
mental speculation is the product of the mode of passion, and knowledge
concerned with only keeping the body comfortable is said to be in the
mode of ignorance.
TEXT 23
niyatam sanga-rahitam
araga-dvesatah krtam
aphala-prepsuna karma
yat tat sattvikam ucyate
SYNONYMS
niyatam--regulative; sanga-rahitam--without attachment; araga-dvesatah-
-without love or hatred; krtam--done; aphala-prepsuna--without fruitive
result; karma--acts; yat--which; tat--that; sattvikam--in the mode of
goodness; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATION
As for actions, that action in accordance with duty, which is performed
without attachment, without love or hate, by one who has renounced
fruitive results, is called action in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Regulated occupational duties, as prescribed in the scriptures in terms
of the different orders and divisions of society, performed without
attachment or proprietary rights and therefore without any love or
hatred, and performed in Krsna consciousness for the satisfaction of
the Supreme, without self-satisfaction or self-gratification, are
called actions in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 24
yat tu kamepsuna karma
sahankarena va punah
kriyate bahulayasam
tad rajasam udahrtam
SYNONYMS
yat--that which; tu--but; kama-ipsuna--with fruitive result; karma--
work; sa-ahankarena--with ego; va--or; punah--again; kriyate--
performed; bahula-ayasam--with great labor; tat--that; rajasam--in the
mode of passion; udahrtam--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his
desires, and which is enacted from a sense of false ego, is called
action in the mode of passion.
TEXT 25
anubandham ksayam himsam
anapeksya ca paurusam
mohad arabhyate karma
yat tat tamasam ucyate
SYNONYMS
anubandham--future bondage; ksayam--destruction; himsam--violence;
anapeksya--without consideration of consequences; ca--also; paurusam--
distressing to others; mohat--by illusion; arabhyate--begun; karma--
work; yat--which; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; ucyate-
-is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And that action performed in ignorance and delusion without
consideration of future bondage or consequences, which inflicts injury
and is impractical, is said to be action in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
One has to give account of one's actions to the state or to the agents
of the Supreme Lord called the Yamadutas. Irresponsible work is
destructive because it destroys the regulative principles of scriptural
injunction. It is often based on violence and is distressing to other
living entities. Such irresponsible work is carried out in the light of
one's personal experience. This is called illusion. And all such
illusory work is a product of the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 26
mukta-sango 'naham-vadi
dhrty-utsaha-samanvitah
siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikarah
karta sattvika ucyate
SYNONYMS
mukta-sangah--liberated from all material association; anaham-vadi--
without false ego; dhrti-utsaha--with great enthusiasm; samanvitah--
qualified in that way; siddhi--perfection; asiddhyoh--failure;
nirvikarah--without change; karta--worker; sattvikah--in the mode of
goodness; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
The worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego, who
is enthusiastic and resolute and who is indifferent to success or
failure, is a worker in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness is always transcendental to the
material modes of nature. He has no expectations for the result of the
work entrusted to him because he is above false ego and pride. Still,
he is always enthusiastic till the completion of such work. He does not
worry about the distress undertaken; he is always enthusiastic. He does
not care for success or failure; he is equal in both distress or
happiness. Such a worker is situated in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 27
ragi karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho himsatmako 'sucih
harsa-sokanvitah karta
rajasah parikirtitah
SYNONYMS
ragi--very much attached; karma-phala--to the fruit of the work;
prepsuh--desiring; lubdhah--greedy; himsa-atmakah--and always envious;
asucih--unclean; harsa-soka-anvitah--complicated, with joy and sorrow;
karta--such a worker; rajasah--in the mode of passion; parikirtitah--is
declared.
TRANSLATION
But that worker who is attached to the fruits of his labor and who
passionately wants to enjoy them, who is greedy, envious and impure and
moved by happiness and distress, is a worker in the mode of passion.
PURPORT
A person is too much attached to a certain kind of work or to the
result because he has too much attachment for materialism or hearth and
home, wife and children. Such a person has no desire for higher
elevation in life. He is simply concerned with making this world as
materially comfortable as possible. He is generally very greedy, and he
thinks that anything attained by him is permanent and never to be lost.
Such a person is envious of others and prepared to do anything wrong
for sense gratification. Therefore such a person is unclean, and he
does not care whether his earning is pure or impure. He is very happy
if his work is successful and very much distressed when his work is not
successful. Such a man is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 28
ayuktah prakrtah stabdhah
satho naiskrtiko 'lasah
visadi dirgha-sutri ca
karta tamasa ucyate
SYNONYMS
ayuktah--without reference to scriptural injunctions; prakrtah--
materialistic; stabdhah--obstinate; sathah--deceitful; naiskrtikah--
expert in insulting others; alasah--lazy; visadi--morose; dirgha-sutri-
-procrastinating; ca--also; karta--worker; tamasah--in the mode of
ignorance; ucyate--is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And that worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions
of the scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert
in insulting others, who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating, is
a worker in the mode of ignorance.
PURPORT
In the scriptural injunctions we find what sort of work should be
performed and what sort of work should not be performed. Those who do
not care for those injunctions engage in work not to be done, and such
persons are generally materialistic. They work according to the modes
of nature, not according to the injunctions of the scripture. Such
workers are not very gentle, and generally they are always cunning and
expert in insulting others. They are very lazy; even though they have
some duty, they do not do it properly, and they put it aside to be done
later on. Therefore they appear to be morose. They procrastinate;
anything which can be done in an hour they drag on for years. Such
workers are situated in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 29
buddher bhedam dhrtes caiva
gunatas tri-vidham srnu
procyamanam asesena
prthaktvena dhananjaya
SYNONYMS
buddheh--of intelligence; bhedam--differences; dhrteh--of steadiness;
ca--also; eva--certainly; gunatah--by the modes of material nature;
tri-vidham--the three kinds of; srnu--just hear; procyamanam--as
described by Me; asesena--in detail; prthaktvena--differently;
dhananjaya--O winner of wealth.
TRANSLATION
Now, O winner of wealth, please listen as I tell you in detail of the
three kinds of understanding and determination according to the three
modes of nature.
PURPORT
Now after explaining knowledge, the object of knowledge and the knower,
in three different divisions according to the modes of material nature,
the Lord is explaining the intelligence and determination of the worker
in the same way.
TEXT 30
pravrttim ca nivrttim ca
karyakarye bhayabhaye
bandham moksam ca ya vetti
buddhih sa partha sattviki
SYNONYMS
pravrttim--deserving; ca--also; nivrttim--not deserving; ca--and;
karya--work; akarye--reaction; bhaya--fearful; abhaye--fearlessness;
bandham--obligation; moksam ca--and liberation; ya--that which; vetti--
knows; buddhih--understanding; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha;
sattviki--in the mode of goodness.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is
not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, that
understanding is established in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Actions which are performed in terms of the directions of the
scriptures are called pravrtti, or actions that deserve to be
performed, and actions which are not so directed are not to be
performed. One who does not know the scriptural directions becomes
entangled in the actions and reactions of work. Understanding which
discriminates by intelligence is situated in the mode of goodness.
TEXT 31
yaya dharmam adharmam ca
karyam cakaryam eva ca
ayathavat prajanati
buddhih sa partha rajasi
SYNONYMS
yaya--by which; dharmam--principles of religion; adharmam--and
irreligion; ca--and; karyam--work; ca--also; akaryam--what ought not to
be done; eva--certainly; ca--also; ayatha-vat--not perfectly;
prajanati--knows; buddhih--intelligence; sa--that; partha--O son of
Prtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATION
And that understanding which cannot distinguish between the religious
way of life and the irreligious, between action that should be done and
action that should not be done, that imperfect understanding, O son of
Prtha, is in the mode of passion.
PURPORT
Intelligence in the mode of passion is always working perversely. It
accepts religions which are not actually religions and rejects actual
religion. All views and activities are misguided. Men of passionate
intelligence understand a great soul to be a common man and accept a
common man as a great soul. They think truth to be untruth and accept
untruth as truth. In all activities they simply take the wrong path;
therefore their intelligence is in the mode of passion.
TEXT 32
adharmam dharmam iti ya
manyate tamasavrta
sarvarthan viparitams ca
buddhih sa partha tamasi
SYNONYMS
adharmam--irreligion; dharmam--religion; iti--thus; ya--which; manyate-
-thinks; tamasa--by illusion; avrta--covered; sarva-arthan--all things;
viparitan--the wrong direction; ca--also; buddhih--intelligence; sa--
that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--the mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and
religion to be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness,
and strives always in the wrong direction, O Partha, is in the mode of
ignorance.
PURPORT
Intelligence in the mode of ignorance is always working the opposite of
the way it should. It accepts religions which are not actually
religions and rejects actual religion. Men in ignorance understand a
great soul to be a common man and accept a common man as a great soul.
They think truth to be untruth and accept untruth as truth. In all
activities they simply take the wrong path; therefore their
intelligence is in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 33
dhrtya yaya dharayate
manah-pranendriya-kriyah
yogenavyabhicarinya
dhrtih sa partha sattviki
SYNONYMS
dhrtya--determination; yaya--by which; dharayate--is sustained; manah--
mind; prana--life; indriya--senses; kriyah--activities; yogena--by yoga
practice; 
avyabhicarinya--without 
any 
break; 
dhrtih--such
determination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; sattviki--in the mode
of goodness.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prtha, that determination which is unbreakable, which is
sustained with steadfastness by yoga practice, and thus controls the
mind, life, and the acts of the senses, is in the mode of goodness.
PURPORT
Yoga is a means to understand the Supreme Soul. One who is steadily
fixed in the Supreme Soul with determination, concentrating one's mind,
life and sensual activities on the Supreme, engages in Krsna
consciousness. That sort of determination is in the mode of goodness.
The word avyabhicarinya is very significant, for it refers to persons
who are engaged in Krsna consciousness and are never deviated by any
other activity.
TEXT 34
yaya tu dharma-kamarthan
dhrtya dharayate 'rjuna
prasangena phalakanksi
dhrtih sa partha rajasi
SYNONYMS
yaya--by which; tu--but; dharma-kama-arthan--for religiosity and
economic development; dhrtya--by determination; dharayate--in such
terms; arjuna--O Arjuna; prasangena--for that; phala-akanksi--desiring
fruitive results; dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son of
Prtha; rajasi--in the mode of passion.
TRANSLATION
And that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in
religion, economic development and sense gratification is of the nature
of passion, O Arjuna.
PURPORT
Any person who is always desirous of fruitive results in religious or
economic activities, whose only desire is sense gratification, and
whose mind, life and senses are thus engaged, is in the mode of
passion.
TEXT 35
yaya svapnam bhayam sokam
visadam madam eva ca
na vimuncati durmedha
dhrtih sa partha tamasi
SYNONYMS
yaya--by 
which; 
svapnam--dream; 
bhayam--fearfulness; 
sokam--
lamentation; visadam--moroseness; madam--illusion; eva--certainly; ca--
also; na--never; vimuncati--is liberated; durmedha--unintelligent;
dhrtih--determination; sa--that; partha--O son of Prtha; tamasi--in the
mode of ignorance.
TRANSLATION
And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness,
lamentation, moroseness and, illusion--such unintelligent determination
is in the mode of darkness.
PURPORT
It should not be concluded that a person in the mode of goodness does
not dream. Here dream means too much sleep. Dreaming is always present;
either in the mode of goodness, passion or ignorance, dreaming is a
natural occurrence. But those who cannot avoid oversleeping, who cannot
avoid the pride of enjoying material objects and who are always
dreaming of lording it over the material world, whose life, mind and
senses are thus engaged, are considered to be in the mode of ignorance.
TEXT 36
sukham tv idanim tri-vidham
srnu me bharatarsabha
abhyasad ramate yatra
duhkhantam ca nigacchati
yat tad agre visam iva
pariname 'mrtopamam
tat sukham sattvikam proktam
atma-buddhi-prasada-jam
SYNONYMS
sukham--happiness; tu--but; idanim--now; tri-vidham--three kinds; srnu-
-hear; me--from Me; bharata-rsabha--O best amongst the Bharatas;
abhyasat--by practice; ramate--enjoyer; yatra--where; duhkha--distress;
antam--end; ca--also; nigacchati--gains. yat--that which; tat--that;
agre--in the beginning; visam iva--like poison; pariname--at the end;
amrta--nectar; upamam--compared to; tat--that; sukham--happiness;
sattvikam--in the mode of goodness; proktam--is said; atma--self;
buddhi--intelligence; prasada-jam--satisfactory.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bharatas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds
of happiness which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he
sometimes comes to the end of all distress. That which in the beginning
may be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and which
awakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode of
goodness.
PURPORT
A conditioned soul tries to enjoy material happiness again and again.
Thus he chews the chewed, but, sometimes, in the course of such
enjoyment, he becomes relieved from material entanglement by
association with a great soul. In other words, a conditioned soul is
always engaged in some type of sense gratification, but when he
understands by good association that it is only a repetition of the
same thing, and he is awakened to his real Krsna consciousness, he is
sometimes relieved from such repetitive so-called happiness.
In the pursuit of self-realization, one has to follow many rules and
regulations to control the mind and the senses and to concentrate the
mind on the self. All these procedures are very difficult, bitter like
poison, but if one is successful in following the regulations and comes
to the transcendental position, he begins to drink real nectar, and he
enjoys life.
TEXT 38
visayendriya-samyogad
yat tad agre 'mrtopamam
pariname visam iva
tat sukham rajasam smrtam
SYNONYMS
visaya--objects of the senses; indriya--senses; samyogat--combination;
yat--which; tat--that; agre--in the beginning; amrta-upamam--just like
nectar; pariname--at the end; visam iva--like poison; tat--that;
sukham--happiness; rajasam--in the mode of passion; smrtam--is
considered.
TRANSLATION
That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their
objects and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is
said to be of the nature of passion.
PURPORT
A young man and a young woman meet, and the senses drive the young man
to see her, to touch her and to have sexual intercourse. In the
beginning this may be very pleasing to the senses, but at the end, or
after some time, it becomes just like poison. They are separated or
there is divorce, there is lamentation, there is sorrow, etc. Such
happiness is always in the mode of passion. Happiness derived from a
combination of the senses and the sense objects is always a cause of
distress and should be avoided by all means.
TEXT 39
yad agre canubandhe ca
sukham mohanam atmanah
nidralasya-pramadottham
tat tamasam udahrtam
SYNONYMS
yat--that which; agre--in the beginning; ca--also; anubandhe--by
binding; ca--also; sukham--happiness; mohanam--illusion; atmanah--of
the self; nidra--sleeping; alasya--laziness; pramada--illusion; uttham-
-produced of; tat--that; tamasam--in the mode of ignorance; udahrtam--
is said to be.
TRANSLATION
And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is
delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness
and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.
PURPORT
One who takes pleasure in laziness and in sleep is certainly in the
mode of darkness, and one who has no idea how to act and how not to act
is also in the mode of ignorance. For the person in the mode of
ignorance, everything is illusion. There is no happiness either in the
beginning or the end. For the person in the mode of passion there might
be some kind of ephemeral happiness in the beginning and at the end
distress, but for the person in the mode of ignorance there is only
distress both in the beginning and at the end.
TEXT 40
na tad asti prthivyam va
divi devesu va punah
sattvam prakrti-jair muktam
yad ebhih syat tribhir gunaih
SYNONYMS
na--not; tat--that; asti--there is; prthivyam--within the universe; va-
-or; divi--in the higher planetary system; devesu--amongst the
demigods; va--or; punah--again; sattvam--existence; prakrti-jaih--under
the influence of material nature; muktam--liberated; yat--that; ebhih--
by this; syat--so becomes; tribhih--by three; gunaih--modes of material
nature.
TRANSLATION
There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the
higher planetary systems, which is freed from the three modes of
material nature.
PURPORT
The Lord here summarizes the total influence of the three modes of
material nature all over the universe.
TEXT 41
brahmana-ksatriya-visam
sudranam ca parantapa
karmani pravibhaktani
svabhava-prabhavair gunaih
SYNONYMS
brahmana--the brahmanas; ksatriya--the ksatriyas; visam--the vaisyas;
sudranam--the sudras; ca--and; parantapa--O subduer of the enemies;
karmani--activities; pravibhaktani--are divided; svabhava--own nature;
prabhavaih--born of; gunaih--by the modes of material nature.
TRANSLATION
Brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras are distinguished by their
qualities of work, O chastiser of the enemy, in accordance with the
modes of nature.
TEXT 42
samo damas tapah saucam
ksantir arjavam eva ca
jnanam vijnanam astikyam
brahma-karma svabhava-jam
SYNONYMS
samah--peacefulness; damah--self-control; tapah--austerity; saucam--
purity; ksantih--tolerance; arjavam--honesty; eva--certainly; ca--and;
jnanam--knowledge; vijnanam--wisdom; astikyam--religiousness; brahma--
of a brahmana; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.
TRANSLATION
Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty,
knowledge, wisdom and religiousness--these are the qualities by which
the brahmanas work.
TEXT 43
sauryam tejo dhrtir daksyam
yuddhe capy apalayanam
danam isvara-bhavas ca
ksatram karma svabhava-jam
SYNONYMS
sauryam--heroism; tejah--power; dhrtih--determination; daksyam--
resourcefulness; yuddhe--in battle; ca--and; api--also; apalayanam--not
fleeing; danam--generosity; isvara--leadership; bhavah--nature; ca--
and; ksatram--ksatriya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own
nature.
TRANSLATION
Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle,
generosity, and leadership are the qualities of work for the ksatriyas.
TEXT 44
krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam
vaisya-karma svabhava-jam
paricaryatmakam karma
sudrasyapi svabhava-jam
SYNONYMS
krsi--plowing; go--cows; raksya--protection; vanijyam--trade; vaisya--
vaisya; karma--duty; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature; paricarya--
service; atmakam--nature; karma--duty; sudrasya--of the sudra; api--
also; svabhava-jam--born of his own nature.
TRANSLATION
Farming, cow protection and business are the qualities of work for the
vaisyas, and for the sudras there is labor and service to others.
TEXT 45
sve sve karmany abhiratah
samsiddhim labhate narah
sva-karma-niratah siddhim
yatha vindati tac chrnu
SYNONYMS
sve--own; sve--own; karmani--in work; abhiratah--following; samsiddhim-
-perfection; labhate--achieves; narah--a man; sva-karma--by his own
duty; niratah--engaged; siddhim--perfection; yatha--as; vindati--
attains; tat--that; srnu--listen.
TRANSLATION
By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now
please hear from Me how this can be done.
TEXT 46
yatah pravrttir bhutanam
yena sarvam idam tatam
sva-karmana tam abhyarcya
siddhim vindati manavah
SYNONYMS
yatah--from whom; pravrttih--the emanation; bhutanam--of all living
entities; yena--by whom; sarvam--all; idam--this; tatam--is pervaded;
sva-karmana--in his own duties; tam--Him; abhyarcya--by worshiping;
siddhim--perfection; vindati--achieves; manavah--a man.
TRANSLATION
By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-
pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain
perfection.
PURPORT
As stated in the Fifteenth Chapter, all living beings are fragmental
parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. As such the Supreme Lord is the
beginning of all living entities. This is confirmed in the Vedanta-
sutra--janmady asya yatah. The Supreme Lord is therefore the beginning
of life of every living entity. And the Supreme Lord, by His two
energies, His external energy and internal energy, is all-pervading.
Therefore one should worship the Supreme Lord with His energies.
Generally the Vaisnava devotees worship the Supreme Lord with His
internal energy. His external energy is a perverted reflection of the
internal energy. The external energy is a background, but the Supreme
Lord by the expansion of His plenary portion as Paramatma is situated
everywhere. He is the Supersoul of all demigods, all human beings, all
animals, everywhere. One should therefore know that as part and parcel
of the Supreme Lord it is his duty to render service unto the Supreme.
Everyone should be engaged in devotional service to the Lord in full
Krsna consciousness. That is recommended in this verse.
Everyone should think that he is engaged in a particular type of
occupation by Hrsikesa, the master of the senses. And, by the result of
the work in which one is engaged, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Sri Krsna, should be worshiped. If one thinks always in this way, in
full Krsna consciousness, then, by the grace of the Lord, he becomes
fully aware of everything. That is the perfection of life. The Lord
says in Bhagavad-gita (12.7), tesam aham samuddharta. The Supreme Lord
Himself takes charge of delivering such a devotee. That is the highest
perfection of life. In whatever occupation one may be engaged, if he
serves the Supreme Lord, he will achieve the highest perfection.
TEXT 47
sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitat
svabhava-niyatam karma
kurvan napnoti kilbisam
SYNONYMS
sreyan--better; sva-dharmah--one's own occupation; vigunah--imperfectly
performed; para-dharmat--another's occupation; su-anusthitat--perfectly
done; svabhava-niyatam--prescribed duties according to one's nature;
karma--work; kurvan--performing; na--never; apnoti--achieve; kilbisam--
sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
It is better to engage in one's own occupation, even though one may
perform it imperfectly, than to accept another's occupation and perform
it perfectly. Prescribed duties according to one's nature, are never
affected by sinful reactions.
PURPORT
One's occupational duty is prescribed in Bhagavad-gita. As already
discussed in previous verses, the duties of a brahmana, ksatriya,
vaisya and sudra are prescribed according to the particular modes of
nature. One should not imitate another's duty. A man who is by nature
attracted to the kind of work done by sudras should not artificially
claim himself to be a brahmana, although he may have been born into a
brahmana family. In this way one should work according to his own
nature; no work is abominable, if performed in the service of the
Supreme Lord. The occupational duty of a brahmana is certainly in the
mode of goodness, but if a person is not by nature in the mode of
goodness, he should not imitate the occupational duty of a brahmana.
For a ksatriya, or administrator, there are so many abominable things;
a ksatriya has to be violent to kill his enemies, and sometimes a
ksatriya has to tell lies for the sake of diplomacy. Such violence and
duplicity accompany political affairs, but a ksatriya is not supposed
to give up his occupational duty and try to perform the duties of a
brahmana.
One should act to satisfy the Supreme Lord. For example, Arjuna was a
ksatriya. He was hesitating to fight the other party. But if such
fighting is performed for the sake of Krsna, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, there need be no fear of degradation. In the business field
also, sometimes a merchant has to tell so many lies to make a profit.
If he does not do so, there can be no profit. Sometimes a merchant
says, "Oh, my dear customer, for you I am making no profit," but one
should know that without profit the merchant cannot exist. Therefore it
should be taken as a simple lie if a merchant says that he is not
making a profit. But the merchant should not think that because he is
engaged in an occupation in which the telling of lies is compulsory, he
should give up his profession and pursue the profession of a brahmana.
That is not recommended. Whether one is a ksatriya, a vaisya, or a
sudra doesn't matter, if he serves, by his work, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Even brahmanas, who perform different types of
sacrifice, sometimes must kill animals because sometimes animals are
sacrificed in such ceremonies. Similarly, if a ksatriya engaged in his
own occupation kills an enemy, there is no sin incurred. In the Third
Chapter these matters have been clearly and elaborately explained;
every man should work for the purpose of Yajna, or for Visnu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anything done for personal sense
gratification is a cause of bondage. The conclusion is that everyone
should be engaged according to the particular mode of nature he has
acquired, and he should decide to work only to serve the supreme cause
of the Supreme Lord.
TEXT 48
saha-jam karma kaunteya
sa-dosam api na tyajet
sarvarambha hi dosena
dhumenagnir ivavrtah
SYNONYMS
saha-jam--born simultaneously; karma--work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
sa-dosam--with fault; api--although; na--never; tyajet--to be given up;
sarva-arambhah--any venture; hi--certainly; dosena--with fault;
dhumena--with smoke; agnih--fire; iva--as; avrtah--covered.
TRANSLATION
Every endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is
covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which is
born of his nature, O son of Kunti, even if such work is full of fault.
PURPORT
In conditioned life, all work is contaminated by the material modes of
nature. Even if one is a brahmana, he has to perform sacrifices in
which animal killing is necessary. Similarly, a ksatriya, however pious
he may be, has to fight enemies. He cannot avoid it. Similarly, a
merchant, however pious he may be, must sometimes hide his profit to
stay in business, or he may sometimes have to do business on the black
market. These things are necessary; one cannot avoid them. Similarly,
even though a man is a sudra serving a bad master, he has to carry out
the order of the master, even though it should not be done. Despite
these flaws, one should continue to carry out his prescribed duties,
for they are born out of his own nature.
A very nice example is given herein. Although fire is pure, still there
is smoke. Yet smoke does not make the fire impure. Even though there is
smoke in the fire, fire is still considered to be the purest of all
elements. If one prefers to give up the work of a ksatriya and take up
the occupation of a brahmana, he is not assured that in the occupation
of a brahmana there are no unpleasant duties. One may then conclude
that in the material world no one can be completely free from the
contamination of material nature. This example of fire and smoke is
very appropriate in this connection. When in wintertime one takes a
stone from the fire, sometimes smoke disturbs the eyes and other parts
of the body, but still one must make use of the fire despite disturbing
conditions. Similarly, one should not give up his natural occupation
because there are some disturbing elements. Rather, one should be
determined to serve the Supreme Lord by his occupational duty in Krsna
consciousness. That is the perfectional point. When a particular type
of occupation is performed for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord,
all the defects in that particular occupation are purified. When the
results of work are purified, when connected with devotional service,
one becomes perfect in seeing the self within, and that is self-
realization.
TEXT 49
asakta-buddhih sarvatra
jitatma vigata-sprhah
naiskarmya-siddhim paramam
sannyasenadhigacchati
SYNONYMS
asakta-buddhih--unattached intelligence; sarvatra--everywhere; jita-
atma--control of the mind; vigata-sprhah--without material desires;
naiskarmya-siddhim--perfection of non-reaction; paramam--supreme;
sannyasena--by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATION
One can obtain the results of renunciation simply by self-control and
by becoming unattached to material things and disregarding material
enjoyments. That is the highest perfetional stage of renunciation.
PURPORT
Real renunciation means that one should always think himself part and
parcel of the Supreme Lord. Therefore he has no right to enjoy the
results of his work. Since he is part and parcel of the Supreme Lord,
the results of his work must be enjoyed by the Supreme Lord. This is
actually Krsna consciousness. The person acting in Krsna consciousness
is really a sannyasi, one in the renounced order of life. By such a
mentality, one is satisfied because he is actually acting for the
Supreme. Thus he is not attached to anything material; he becomes
accustomed to not taking pleasure in anything beyond the transcendental
happiness derived from the service of the Lord. A sannyasi is supposed
to be free from the reactions of his past activities, but a person who
is in Krsna consciousness automatically attains this perfection without
even accepting the so-called order of renunciation. This state of mind
is called yogarudha, or the perfectional stage of yoga, as confirmed in
the Third Chapter, yas tv atma-ratir eva syat: one who is satisfied in
himself has no fear of any kind of reaction from his activity.
TEXT 50
siddhim prapto yatha brahma
tathapnoti nibodha me
samasenaiva kaunteya
nistha jnanasya ya para
SYNONYMS
siddhim--perfection; praptah--achieving; yatha--as; brahma--the
Supreme; tatha--so; apnoti--achieves; nibodha--try to understand; me--
from Me; samasena--summarily; eva--certainly; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nistha--stage; jnanasya--of knowledge; ya--which; para--transcendental.
TRANSLATION
O son of Kunti, learn from Me in brief how one can attain to the
supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, by acting in the way I shall now
summarize.
PURPORT
The Lord describes for Arjuna how one can achieve the highest
perfectional stage simply by being engaged in his occupational duty,
performing that duty for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One
attains the supreme stage of Brahman simply by renouncing the result of
his work for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. That is the process
of self-realization. Actual perfection of knowledge is in attaining
pure Krsna consciousness; that is described in the following verses.
TEXTS 51-53
buddhya visuddhaya yukto
dhrtyatmanam niyamya ca
sabdadin visayams tyaktva
raga-dvesau vyudasya ca
vivikta-sevi laghv-asi
yata-vak-kaya-manasah
dhyana-yoga-paro nityam
vairagyam samupasritah
ahankaram balam darpam
kamam krodham parigraham
vimucya nirmamah santo
brahma-bhuyaya kalpate
SYNONYMS
buddhya--by the intelligence; visuddhaya--fully purified; yuktah--such
engagement; dhrtya--determination; atmanam--self; niyamya--regulated;
ca--also; sabda-adin--the sense objects, such as sound, etc.; visayan--
sense objects; tyaktva--giving up; raga--attachment; dvesau--hatred;
vyudasya--having laid aside; ca--also; vivikta-sevi--living in a
secluded place; laghu-asi--eating a small quantity; yata-vak--control
of speech; kaya--body; manasah--control of the mind; dhyana-yoga-parah-
-always absorbed in trance; nityam--twenty-four hours a day; vairagyam-
-detachment; samupasritah--taken shelter of; ahankaram--false ego;
balam--false strength; darpam--false pride; kamam--lust; krodham--
anger; parigraham--acceptance of material things; vimucya--being
delivered; nirmamah--without proprietorship; santah--peaceful; brahma-
bhuyaya--to become self-realized; kalpate--is understood.
TRANSLATION
Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with
determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, being
freed from attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place,
who eats little and who controls the body and the tongue, and is always
in trance and is detached, who is without false ego, false strength,
false pride, lust, anger, and who does not accept material things, such
a person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.
PURPORT
When one is purified by knowledge, he keeps himself in the mode of
goodness. Thus one becomes the controller of the mind and is always in
trance. Because he is not attached to the objects of sense
gratification, he does not eat more than what he requires, and he
controls the activities of his body and mind. He has no false ego
because he does not accept the body as himself. Nor has he a desire to
make the body fat and strong by accepting so many material things.
Because he has no bodily concept of life, he is not falsely proud. He
is satisfied with everything that is offered to him by the grace of the
Lord, and he is never angry in the absence of sense gratification. Nor
does he endeavor to acquire sense objects. Thus when he is completely
free from false ego, he becomes nonattached to all material things, and
that is the stage of self-realization of Brahman. That stage is called
the brahma-bhuta stage. When one is free from the material conception
of life, he becomes peaceful and cannot be agitated. This is described
in Bhagavad-gita (2.70):
apuryamanam acala-pratistham
samudram apah pravisanti yadvat
tadvat kama yam pravisanti sarve
sa santim apnoti na kama-kami
"A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires--that
enter like rivers into the ocean, which is ever being filled but is
always still--can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to
satisfy such desires."
TEXT 54
brahma-bhutah prasannatma
na socati na kanksati
samah sarvesu bhutesu
mad-bhaktim labhate param
SYNONYMS
brahma-bhutah--being one with the Absolute; prasanna-atma--fully
joyful; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;
samah--equally disposed; sarvesu--all; bhutesu--living entities; mat-
bhaktim--My devotional service; labhate--gains; param--transcendental.
TRANSLATION
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme
Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have
anything. He is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state
he attains pure devotional service unto Me.
PURPORT
To the impersonalist, achieving the brahma-bhuta stage, becoming one
with the Absolute, is the last word. But for the personalist, or pure
devotee, one has to go still further to become engaged in pure
devotional service. This means that one who is engaged in pure
devotional service to the Supreme Lord is already in a state of
liberation, called brahma-bhuta, oneness with the Absolute. Without
being one with the Supreme, the Absolute, one cannot render service
unto Him. In the absolute conception, there is no difference between
the served and the servitor; yet the distinction is there, in a higher
spiritual sense.
In the material concept of life, when one works for sense
gratification, there is misery, but in the absolute world, when one is
engaged in pure devotional service, there is no misery. The devotee in
Krsna consciousness has nothing to lament or desire. Since God is full,
a living entity who is engaged in God's service, in Krsna
consciousness, becomes also full in himself. He is just like a river
cleansed of all dirty water. Because a pure devotee has no thought
other than Krsna, he is naturally always joyful. He does not lament for
any material loss or gain, because he is full in the service of the
Lord. He has no desire for material enjoyment because he knows that
every living entity is a fragmental part and parcel of the Supreme Lord
and therefore eternally a servant. He does not see, in the material
world, someone as higher and someone as lower; higher and lower
positions are ephemeral, and a devotee has nothing to do with ephemeral
appearances or disappearances. For him stone and gold are of equal
value. This is the brahma-bhuta stage, and this stage is attained very
easily by the pure devotee. In that stage of existence, the idea of
becoming one with the Supreme Brahman and annihilating one's
individuality becomes hellish, and the idea of attaining the heavenly
kingdom becomes phantasmagoria, and the senses are like broken
serpents' teeth. As there is no fear of a serpent with broken teeth, so
there is no fear from the senses when they are automatically
controlled. The world is miserable for the materially infected person,
but for a devotee the entire world is as good as Vaikuntha, or the
spiritual sky. The highest personality in this material universe is no
more significant than an ant for a devotee. Such a stage can be
achieved by the mercy of Lord Caitanya, who preached pure devotional
service in this age.
TEXT 55
bhaktya mam abhijanati
yavan yas casmi tattvatah
tato mam tattvato jnatva
visate tad-anantaram
SYNONYMS
bhaktya--by pure devotional service; mam--Me; abhijanati--one can know;
yavan--as much as; yah ca asmi--as I am; tattvatah--in truth; tatah--
thereafter; mam--Me; tattvatah--by truth; jnatva--knowing; visate--
enters; tat-anantaram--thereafter.
TRANSLATION
One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotional
service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord by
such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and His plenary portions
cannot be understood by mental speculation nor by the nondevotees. If
anyone wants to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he has
to take to pure devotional service under the guidance of a pure
devotee. Otherwise, the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
will always be hidden. It is already stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.25),
naham prakasah sarvasya: He is not revealed to everyone. No one can
understand God simply by erudite scholarship or mental speculation.
Only one who is actually engaged in Krsna consciousness and devotional
service can understand what Krsna is. University degrees are not
helpful.
One who is fully conversant with the Krsna science becomes eligible to
enter into the spiritual kingdom, the abode of Krsna. Becoming Brahman
does not mean that one loses his identity. Devotional service is there,
and as long as devotional service exists, there must be God, the
devotee, and the process of devotional service. Such knowledge is never
vanquished, even after liberation. Liberation involves getting free
from the concept of material life; in spiritual life the same
distinction is there, the same individuality is there, but in pure
Krsna consciousness. One should not misunderstand that the word visate,
"enters into Me," supports the monist theory that one becomes
homogeneous with the impersonal Brahman. No. Visate means that one can
enter into the abode of the Supreme Lord in his's individuality to
engage in His association and render service unto Him. For instance, a
green bird enters a green tree not to become one with the tree but to
enjoy the fruits of the tree. impersonalists generally give the example
of a river flowing into the ocean and merging. This may be a source of
happiness for the impersonalist, but the personalist keeps his personal
individuality like an aquatic in the ocean. We find so many living
entities within the ocean, if we go deep. Surface acquaintance with the
ocean is not sufficient; one must have complete knowledge of the
aquatics living in the ocean depths.
Because of his pure devotional service, a devotee can understand the
transcendental qualities and the opulences of the Supreme Lord in
truth. As it is stated in the Eleventh Chapter, only by devotional
service can one understand. The same is confirmed here; one can
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead by devotional service and
enter into His kingdom.
After attainment of the brahma-bhuta stage of freedom from material
conceptions, devotional service begins by one's hearing about the Lord.
When one hears about the Supreme Lord, automatically the brahma-bhuta
stage develops, and material contamination--greediness and lust for
sense enjoyment--disappears. As lust and desires disappear from the
heart of a devotee, he becomes more attached to the service of the
Lord, and by such attachment he becomes free from material
contamination. In that state of life he can understand the Supreme
Lord. This is the statement of Srimad-Bhagavatam also. After liberation
the process of bhakti, or transcendental service, continues. The
Vedanta-sutra (4.1.12) confirms this: a-prayanat tatrapi hi drstam.
This means that after liberation the process of devotional service
continues. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, real devotional liberation is
defined as the reinstatement of the living entity in his own identity,
his own constitutional position. The constitutional position is already
explained: every living entity is the part-and-parcel fragmental
portion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore his constitutional position is
to serve. After liberation, this service is never stopped. Actual
liberation is getting free from misconceptions of life.
TEXT 56
sarva-karmany api sada
kurvano mad-vyapasrayah
mat-prasadad avapnoti
sasvatam padam avyayam
SYNONYMS
sarva--all; karmani--activities; api--although; sada--always; kurvanah-
-performing; mat--under My; vyapasrayah--protection; mat--My; prasadat-
-mercy; avapnoti--achieves; sasvatam--eternal; padam--abode; avyayam--
imperishable.
TRANSLATION
Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My devotee, under My
protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.
PURPORT
The word mad-vyapasrayah means under the protection of the Supreme
Lord. To be free from material contamination, a pure devotee acts under
the direction of the Supreme Lord or His representative, the spiritual
master. There is no time limitation for a pure devotee. He is always,
twenty-four hours, one hundred percent engaged in activities under the
direction of the Supreme Lord. To a devotee who is thus engaged in
Krsna consciousness the Lord is very, very kind. In spite of all
difficulties, he is eventually placed in the transcendental abode, or
Krsnaloka. He is guaranteed entrance there; there is no doubt about it.
In that supreme abode, there is no change; everything is eternal,
imperishable and full of knowledge.
TEXT 57
cetasa sarva-karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parah
buddhi-yogam upasritya
mac-cittah satatam bhava
SYNONYMS
cetasa--by intelligence; sarva-karmani--all kinds of activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--My protection; buddhi-yogam--
devotional activities; upasritya--taking shelter of; mat-cittah--
consciousness; satatam--twenty-four hours a day; bhava--just become.
TRANSLATION
In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My
protection. In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.
PURPORT
When one acts in Krsna consciousness, he does not act as the master of
the world. Just like a servant, one should act fully under the
direction of the Supreme Lord. A servant has no individual
independence. He acts only on the order of the master. A servant acting
on behalf of the supreme master has no affection for profit and loss.
He simply discharges his duty faithfully in terms of the order of the
Lord. Now, one may argue that Arjuna was acting under the personal
direction of Krsna, but, when Krsna is not present, how should one act?
If one acts according to the direction of Krsna in this book, as well
as under the guidance of the representative of Krsna, then the result
will be the same. The Sanskrit word mat-parah is very important in this
verse. It indicates that one has no goal in life save and except acting
in Krsna consciousness just to satisfy Krsna. And, while working in
that way, one should think of Krsna only: "I have been appointed to
discharge this particular duty by Krsna." While acting in such a way,
one naturally has to think of Krsna. This is perfect Krsna
consciousness. One should, however, note that after doing something
whimsically he should not offer the result to the Supreme Lord. That
sort of duty is not in the devotional service of Krsna consciousness.
One should act according to the order of Krsna. This is a very
important point. That order of Krsna comes through disciplic succession
from the bona fide spiritual master. Therefore the spiritual master's
order should be taken as the prime duty of life. If one gets a bona
fide spiritual master and acts according to his direction, then his's
perfection of life in Krsna consciousness is guaranteed.
TEXT 58
mac-cittah sarva-durgani
mat-prasadat tarisyasi
atha cet tvam ahankaran
na srosyasi vinanksyasi
SYNONYMS
mat--My; cittah--consciousness; sarva--all; durgani--impediments; mat--
My; prasadat--My mercy; tarisyasi--you will overcome; atha--therefore;
cet--if; tvam--you; ahankarat--by false ego; na--not; srosyasi--do not
hear; vinanksyasi--then lose yourself.
TRANSLATION
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of
conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such
consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be
lost.
PURPORT
A person in full Krsna consciousness is not unduly anxious to execute
the duties of his existence. The foolish cannot understand this great
freedom from all anxiety. For one who acts in Krsna consciousness, Lord
Krsna becomes the most intimate friend. He always looks after His
friend's comfort, and He gives Himself to His friend, who is so
devotedly engaged working twenty-four hours a day to please the Lord.
Therefore, no one should be carried away by the false ego of the bodily
concept of life. One should not falsely think himself independent of
the laws of material nature or free to act. He is already under strict
material laws. But, as soon as he acts in Krsna consciousness, he is
liberated, free from the material perplexities. One should note very
carefully that one who is not active in Krsna consciousness is losing
himself in the material whirlpool, in the ocean of birth and death. No
conditioned soul actually knows what is to be done and what is not to
be done, but a person who acts in Krsna consciousness is free to act
because everything is prompted by Krsna from within and confirmed by
the spiritual master.
TEXT 59
yad ahankaram asritya
na yotsya iti manyase
mithyaisa vyavasayas te
prakrtis tvam niyoksyati
SYNONYMS
yat--therefore; ahankaram--false ego; asritya--taking shelter; na--not;
yotsye--shall fight; iti--thus; manyase--think; mithya esah--this is
all false; vyavasayah te--your determination; prakrtih--material
nature; tvam--you; niyoksyati--will engage you.
TRANSLATION
If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you
will be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged
in warfare.
PURPORT
Arjuna was a military man, and born of the nature of the ksatriya.
Therefore his natural duty was to fight. But, due to false ego, he was
fearing that by killing his teacher, grandfather and friends, there
would be sinful reactions. Actually he was considering himself master
of his actions, as if he were directing the good and bad results of
such work. He forgot that the Supreme Personality of Godhead was
present there, instructing him to fight. That is the forgetfulness of
the conditioned soul. The Supreme Personality gives directions as to
what is good and what is bad, and one simply has to act in Krsna
consciousness to attain the perfection of life. No one can ascertain
his destiny as the Supreme Lord can; therefore the best course is to
take direction from the Supreme Lord and act. No one should neglect the
order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the order of the
spiritual master who is the representative of God. One should act
unhesitatingly to execute the order of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead--that will keep him safe under all circumstances.
TEXT 60
svabhava-jena kaunteya
nibaddhah svena karmana
kartum necchasi yan mohat
karisyasy avaso 'pi tat
SYNONYMS
svabhava-jena--by one's own nature; kaunteya--O son of Kunti;
nibaddhah--conditioned; svena--by one's own; karmana--activities;
kartum--to do; na--not; icchasi--like; yat--that; mohat--by illusion;
karisyasi--you will act; avasah--imperceptibly; api--even; tat--that.
TRANSLATION
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction.
But, compelled by your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of
Kunti.
PURPORT
If one refuses to act under the direction of the Supreme Lord, then he
is compelled to act by the modes in which he is situated. Everyone is
under the spell of a particular combination of the modes of nature and
is acting in that way. But anyone who voluntarily engages himself under
the direction of the Supreme Lord becomes glorious.
TEXT 61
isvarah sarva-bhutanam
hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati
bhramayan sarva-bhutani
yantrarudhani mayaya
SYNONYMS
isvarah--the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities; hrt-
dese--in the location of the heart; arjuna--O Arjuna; tisthati--
resides; bhramayan--causing to travel; sarva-bhutani--all living
entities; yantra--machine; arudhani--being so placed; mayaya--under the
spell of material energy.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a
machine, made of the material energy.
PURPORT
Arjuna was not the supreme knower, and his decision to fight or not to
fight was confined to his limited discretion. Lord Krsna instructed
that the individual is not all in all. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, or He Himself, Krsna, the localized Supersoul, sits in the
heart directing the living being. After changing bodies, the living
entity forgets his past deeds, but the Supersoul, as the knower of the
past, present and future, remains the witness of all his activities.
Therefore all the activities of living entities are directed by this
Supersoul. The living entity gets what he deserves and is carried by
the material body, which is created in the material energy under the
direction of the Supersoul. As soon as a living entity is placed in a
particular type of body, he has to work under the spell of that bodily
situation. A person seated in a high-speed motorcar goes faster than
one seated in a slower car, though the living entities, the drivers,
may be the same. Similarly, by the order of the Supreme Soul, material
nature fashions a particular type of body to a particular type of
living entity to work according to his past desires. The living entity
is not independent. One should not think himself independent of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The individual is always under His
control. Therefore his duty is to surrender, and that is the injunction
of the next verse.
TEXT 62
tam eva saranam gaccha
sarva-bhavena bharata
tat-prasadat param santim
sthanam prapsyasi sasvatam
SYNONYMS
tam--unto Him; eva--certainly; saranam--surrender;  gaccha--go; sarva-
bhavena--in all respects; bharata--O son of Bharata; tat-prasadat--by
His grace; param--transcendental; santim--in peace; sthanam--abode;
prapsyasi--you will get; sasvatam--eternal.
TRANSLATION
O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will
attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.
PURPORT
A living entity should therefore surrender unto the Supreme Personality
of Godhead who is situated in everyone's heart, and that will relieve
him from all kinds of miseries of this material existence. By such
surrender, one will not only be released from all miseries in this
life, but at the end he will reach the Supreme God. The transcendental
world is described in the Vedic literature (Rg Veda 1.22.20) as tad
visnoh paramam padam. Since all of creation is the kingdom of God,
everything material is actually spiritual, but paramam padam
specifically refers to the eternal abode, which is called the spiritual
sky or Vaikuntha.
In the Fifteenth Chapter of Bhagavad-gita it is stated, sarvasya caham
hrdi sannivistah: the Lord is seated in everyone's heart, so this
recommendation that one should surrender unto the Supersoul sitting
within means that one should surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna. Krsna has already been accepted by Arjuna as the
Supreme. He was accepted in the Tenth Chapter as param brahma param
dhama. Arjuna has accepted Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and the supreme abode of all living entities, not only because of his
personal experience but also because of the evidence of great
authorities like Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa.
TEXT 63
iti te jnanam akhyatam
guhyad guhyataram maya
vimrsyaitad asesena
yathecchasi tatha kuru
SYNONYMS
iti--thus; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; akhyatam--described;
guhyat--confidential; guhya-taram--still more confidential; maya--by
Me; vimrsya--by deliberation; etat--that; asesena--fully; yatha--as
you; icchasi--you like; tatha--that; kuru--perform.
TRANSLATION
Thus I have explained to you the most confidential of all knowledge.
Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.
PURPORT
The Lord has already explained to Arjuna the knowledge of brahma-bhuta.
One who is in the brahma-bhuta condition is joyful; he never laments,
nor does he desire anything. That is due to confidential knowledge.
Krsna also discloses knowledge of the Supersoul. This is also Brahman
knowledge, knowledge of Brahman, but it is superior.
Here Lord Krsna tells Arjuna that he can do as he chooses. God does not
interfere with the little independence of the living entity. In
Bhagavad-gita, the Lord has explained in all respects how one can
elevate his living condition. The best advice imparted to Arjuna is to
surrender unto the Supersoul seated within his heart. By right
discrimination, one should agree to act according to the order of the
Supersoul. That will help one become situated constantly in Krsna
consciousness, the highest perfectional stage of human life. Arjuna is
being directly ordered by the Personality of Godhead to fight.
Surrender to the Supreme Personality of Godhead is in the best interest
of the living entities. It is not for the interest of the Supreme.
Before surrendering, one is free to deliberate on this subject as far
as the intelligence goes; that is the best way to accept the
instruction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such instruction
comes also through the spiritual master, the bona fide representative
of Krsna.
TEXT 64
sarva-guhyatamam bhuyah
srnu me paramam vacah
isto 'si me drdham iti
tato vaksyami te hitam
SYNONYMS
sarva-guhya-tamam--the most confidential of all; bhuyah--again; srnu--
just hear; me--from Me; paramam--the supreme; vacah--instruction; istah
asi--you are very dear to Me; me--of Me; drdham--very; iti--thus;
tatah--therefore; vaksyami--I am speaking; te--for your; hitam--
benefit.
TRANSLATION
Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme
instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me,
for it is for your benefit.
PURPORT
The Lord has given Arjuna confidential knowledge of the Supersoul
within everyone's heart, and now He is giving the most confidential
part of this knowledge: just surrender unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. At the end of the Ninth Chapter He has said, man-manah: "Just
always think of Me." The same instruction is repeated here to stress
the essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. This essence is not
understood by a common man, but by one who is actually very dear to
Krsna, a pure devotee of Krsna. This is the most important instruction
in all Vedic literature. What Krsna is saying in this connection is the
most essential part of knowledge, and it should be carried out not only
by Arjuna but by all living entities.
TEXT 65
man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yaji mam namaskuru
mam evaisyasi satyam te
pratijane priyo 'si me
SYNONYMS
mat-manah--thinking of Me; bhava--just become; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;
mat-yaji--My worshiper; mam--unto Me; namaskuru--offer your obeisances;
mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyasi--come; satyam--truly; te--to you;
pratijane--I promise; priyah--dear; asi--you are; me--Mine.
TRANSLATION
Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and offer your
homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you
this because you are My very dear friend.
PURPORT
The most confidential part of knowledge is that one should become a
pure devotee of Krsna and always think of Him and act for Him. One
should not become an official meditator. Life should be so molded that
one will always have the chance to think of Krsna. One should always
act in such a way that all his daily activities are in connection with
Krsna. He should arrange his life in such a way that throughout the
twenty-four hours he cannot but think of Krsna. And the Lord's promise
is that anyone who is in such pure Krsna consciousness will certainly
return to the abode of Krsna, where he will be engaged in the
association of Krsna face to face. This most confidential part of
knowledge is spoken to Arjuna because he is the dear friend of Krsna.
Everyone who follows the path of Arjuna can become a dear friend to
Krsna and obtain the same perfection as Arjuna.
These words stress that one should concentrate his mind upon Krsna--the
very form with two hands carrying a flute, the bluish boy with a
beautiful face and peacock feathers in His hair. There are descriptions
of Krsna found in the Brahma-samhita and other literatures. One should
fix his mind on this original form of Godhead, Krsna. He should not
even divert his attention to other forms of the Lord. The Lord has
multiforms as Visnu, Narayana, Rama, Varaha, etc., but a devotee should
concentrate his mind on the form that was present before Arjuna.
Concentration of the mind on the form of Krsna constitutes the most
confidential part of knowledge, and this is disclosed to Arjuna because
Arjuna is the most dear friend of Krsna's.
TEXT 66
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
SYNONYMS
sarva-dharman--all varieties of religion; parityajya--abandoning; mam--
unto Me; ekam--only; saranam--surrender; vraja--go; aham--I; tvam--you;
sarva--all; papebhyah--from sinful reactions; moksayisyami--deliver;
ma--not; sucah--worry.
TRANSLATION
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.
PURPORT
The Lord has described various kinds of knowledge, processes of
religion, knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, knowledge of the Supersoul,
knowledge of the different types of orders and statuses of social life,
knowledge of the renounced order of life, knowledge of nonattachment,
sense and mind control, meditation, etc. He has described in so many
ways different types of religion. Now, in summarizing Bhagavad-gita,
the Lord says that Arjuna should give up all the processes that have
been explained to him; he should simply surrender to Krsna. That
surrender will save him from all kinds of sinful reactions, for the
Lord personally promises to protect him.
In the Seventh Chapter it was said that only one who has become free
from all sinful reactions can take to the worship of Lord Krsna. Thus
one may think that unless he is free from all sinful reactions he
cannot take to the surrendering process. To such doubts it is here said
that even if one is not free from all sinful reactions, simply by the
process of surrendering to Sri Krsna he is automatically freed. There
is no need of strenuous effort to free oneself from sinful reactions.
One should unhesitatingly accept Krsna as the supreme savior of all
living entities. With faith and love, one should surrender unto Him.
According to the devotional process, one should simply accept such
religious principles that will lead ultimately to the devotional
service of the Lord. One may perform a particular occupational duty
according to his position in the social order, but if by executing his
duty one does not come to the point of Krsna consciousness, all his
activities are in vain. Anything that does not lead to the perfectional
stage of Krsna consciousness should be avoided. One should be confident
that in all circumstances Krsna will protect him from all difficulties.
There is no need of thinking how one should keep the body and soul
together. Krsna will see to that. One should always think himself
helpless and should consider Krsna the only basis for his progress in
life. As soon as one seriously engages himself in devotional service to
the Lord in full Krsna consciousness, at once he becomes freed from all
contamination of material nature. There are different processes of
religion and purificatory processes by cultivation of knowledge,
meditation in the mystic yoga system, etc., but one who surrenders unto
Krsna does not have to execute so many methods. That simple surrender
unto Krsna will save him from unnecessarily wasting time. One can thus
make all progress at once and be freed from all sinful reaction.
One should be attracted by the beautiful vision of Krsna. His name is
Krsna because He is all-attractive. One who becomes attracted by the
beautiful, all-powerful, omnipotent vision of Krsna is fortunate. There
are different kinds of transcendentalists--some of them are attached to
the impersonal Brahman vision, some of them are attracted by the
Supersoul feature, etc., but one who is attracted to the personal
feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and, above all, one who
is attracted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Krsna Himself, is
the most perfect transcendentalist. In other words, devotional service
to Krsna, in full consciousness, is the most confidential part of
knowledge, and this is the essence of the whole Bhagavad-gita. Karma-
yogis, empiric philosophers, mystics, and devotees are all called
transcendentalists, but one who is a pure devotee is the best of all.
The particular words used here, ma sucah, "Don't fear, don't hesitate,
don't worry," are very significant. One may be perplexed as to how one
can give up all kinds of religious forms and simply surrender unto
Krsna, but such worry is useless.
TEXT 67
idam te natapaskaya
nabhaktaya kadacana
na casusrusave vacyam
na ca mam yo 'bhyasuyati
SYNONYMS
idam--this; te--you; na--never; atapaskaya--one who is not austere; na-
-never; abhaktaya--one who is not a devotee; kadacana--at any time; na-
-never; ca--also; asusrusave--one who is not engaged in devotional
service; vacyam--to be spoken; na--never; ca--also; mam--unto Me; yah--
anyone; abhyasuyati--envious.
TRANSLATION
This confidential knowledge may not be explained to those who are not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who
is envious of Me.
PURPORT
Persons who have not undergone the austerities of the religious
process, who have never attempted devotional service in Krsna
consciousness, who have not tended a pure devotee, and especially those
who are conscious of Krsna as a historical personality or who are
envious of the greatness of Krsna, should not be told this most
confidential part of knowledge. It is, however, sometimes found that
even demoniac persons who are envious of Krsna, worshiping Krsna in a
different way, take to the profession of explaining Bhagavad-gita in a
different way to make business, but anyone who desires actually to
understand Krsna must avoid such commentaries on Bhagavad-gita.
Actually the purpose of Bhagavad-gita is not understandable to those
who are sensuous--even if one is not sensuous but is strictly following
the disciplines enjoined in the Vedic scripture, if he is not a
devotee, he also cannot understand Krsna. Even when one poses himself
as a devotee of Krsna, but is not engaged in Krsna conscious
activities, he also cannot understand Krsna. There are many persons who
envy Krsna because He has explained in Bhagavad-gita that He is the
Supreme and that nothing is above Him or equal to Him. There are many
persons who are envious of Krsna. Such persons should not be told of
Bhagavad-gita, for they cannot understand. There is no possibility of
faithless persons' understanding Bhagavad-gita and Krsna. Without
understanding Krsna from the authority of a pure devotee, one should
not try to comment upon Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 68
ya idam paramam guhyam
mad-bhaktesv abhidhasyati
bhaktim mayi param krtva
mam evaisyaty asamsayah
SYNONYMS
yah--anyone; idam--this; paramam--most; guhyam--confidential; mat--
Mine; bhaktesu--amongst devotees of; abhidhasyati--explains; bhaktim--
devotional service; mayi--unto Me; param--transcendental; krtva--having
done; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; esyati--comes; asamsayah--without
doubt.
TRANSLATION
For one who explains the supreme secret to the devotees, devotional
service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.
PURPORT
Generally it is advised that Bhagavad-gita be discussed amongst the
devotees only, for those who are not devotees will neither understand
Krsna nor Bhagavad-gita. Those who do not accept Krsna as He is and
Bhagavad-gita as it is should not try to explain Bhagavad-gita
whimsically and become offenders. Bhagavad-gita should be explained to
persons who are ready to accept Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is a subject matter for the devotees only and not for
philosophical speculators. Anyone, however, who tries sincerely to
present Bhagavad-gita as it is will advance in devotional activities
and reach the pure devotional state of life. As a result of such pure
devotion, he is sure to go back home, back to Godhead.
TEXT 69
na ca tasman manusyesu
kascin me priya-krttamah
bhavita na ca me tasmad
anyah priyataro bhuvi
SYNONYMS
na--never; ca--and; tasmat--therefore; manusyesu--among mankind;
kascit--anyone; me--My; priya-krt-tamah--more dear; bhavita--will
become; na--nor; ca--and; me--My; tasmat--than him; anyah--other;
priya-tarah--dearer; bhuvi--in this world.
TRANSLATION
There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will
there ever be one more dear.
TEXT 70
adhyesyate ca ya imam
dharmyam samvadam avayoh
jnana-yajnena tenaham
istah syam iti me matih
SYNONYMS
adhyesyate--will study; ca--also; yah--he; imam--this; dharmyam--
sacred; samvadam--conversation; avayoh--of ours; jnana--knowledge;
yajnena--by sacrifice; tena--by him; aham--I; istah--worshiped; syam--
shall be; iti--thus; me--My; matih--opinion.
TRANSLATION
And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation worships Me
by his intelligence.
TEXT 71
sraddhavan anasuyas ca
srnuyad api yo narah
so 'pi muktah subhal lokan
prapnuyat punya-karmanam
SYNONYMS
sraddha-van--faithful; anasuyah ca--and not envious; srnuyat--does
hear; api--certainly; yah--who; narah--a man; sah--he; api--also;
muktah--being liberated; subhan--auspicious; lokan--planets; prapnuyat-
-attains; punya-karmanam--of the pious.
TRANSLATION
And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from
sinful reactions and attains to the planets where the pious dwell.
PURPORT
In the 67th verse of this chapter, the Lord explicitly forbade the
Gita's being spoken to those who are envious of the Lord. In other
words, Bhagavad-gita is for the devotees only. But it so happens that
sometimes a devotee of the Lord will hold open class, and in that class
all the students are not expected to be devotees. Why do such persons
hold open class? It is explained here that although everyone is not a
devotee, still there are many men who are not envious of Krsna. They
have faith in Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If such
persons hear from a bona fide devotee about the Lord, the result is
that they become at once free from all sinful reactions and after that
attain to the planetary system where all righteous persons are
situated. Therefore simply by hearing Bhagavad-gita, even a person who
does not try to be a pure devotee attains the result of righteous
activities. Thus a pure devotee of the Lord gives everyone a chance to
become free from all sinful reactions and to become a devotee of the
Lord.
Generally those who are free from sinful reactions, those who are
righteous, very easily take to Krsna consciousness. The word punya-
karmanam is very significant here. This refers to the performance of
great sacrifices. Those who are righteous in performing devotional
service but who are not pure can attain the planetary system of the
polestar, or Dhruvaloka, where Dhruva Maharaja is presiding. He is a
great devotee of the Lord, and he has a special planet which is called
the polestar.
TEXT 72
kaccid etac chrutam partha
tvayaikagrena cetasa
kaccid ajnana-sammohah
pranastas te dhananjaya
SYNONYMS
kaccit--whether; etat--this; srutam--heard; partha--O son of Prtha;
tvaya--by you; eka-agrena--with full attention; cetasa--by the mind;
kaccit--whether; ajnana--ignorant; sammohah--illusion; pranastah--
dispelled; te--of you; dhananjaya--O conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).
TRANSLATION
O conqueror of wealth, Arjuna, have you heard this attentively with
your mind? And are your illusions and ignorance now dispelled?
PURPORT
The Lord was acting as the spiritual master of Arjuna. Therefore it was
His duty to inquire from Arjuna whether he understood the whole
Bhagavad-gita in its proper perspective. If not, the Lord was ready to
re-explain any point, or the whole Bhagavad-gita if so required.
Actually, anyone who hears Bhagavad-gita from a bona fide spiritual
master like Krsna or His representative will find that all his
ignorance is dispelled. Bhagavad-gita is not an ordinary book written
by a poet or fiction writer; it is spoken by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Any person, if he is fortunate enough to hear these teachings
from Krsna or from His bona fide spiritual representative, is sure to
become a liberated person and get out of the darkness of ignorance.
TEXT 73
arjuna uvaca
nasto mohah smrtir labdha
tvat-prasadan mayacyuta
sthito 'smi gata-sandehah
karisye vacanam tava
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; nastah--dispelled; mohah--illusion; smrtih-
-memory; labdha--regained; tvat-prasadat--by Your mercy; maya--by me;
acyuta--O infallible Krsna; sthitah--situated; asmi--I am; gata--
removed; sandehah--all doubts; karisye--I shall execute; vacanam--
order; tava--Your.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Krsna, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone.
I have regained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now firm and free
from doubt and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.
PURPORT
The constitutional position of a living entity, represented by Arjuna,
is that he has to act according to the order of the Supreme Lord. He is
meant for self-discipline. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that the actual
position of the living entity is that of eternal servant of the Supreme
Lord. Forgetting this principle, the living entity becomes conditioned
by material nature, but in serving the Supreme Lord, he becomes the
liberated servant of God. The living entity's constitutional position
is to be a servitor; he has to serve either the illusory maya or the
Supreme Lord. If he serves the Supreme Lord, he is in his normal
condition, but if he prefers to serve the illusory external energy,
then certainly he will be in bondage. In illusion the living entity is
serving in this material world. He is bound by his lust and desires,
yet he thinks of himself as the master of the world. This is called
illusion. When a person is liberated, his illusion is over, and he
voluntarily surrenders unto the Supreme to act according to His
desires. The last illusion, the last snare of maya to trap the living
entity, is the proposition that he is God. The living entity thinks
that he is no longer a conditioned soul, but God. He is so
unintelligent that he does not think that if he were God, then how
could he be in doubt? That he does not consider. So that is the last
snare of illusion. Actually to become free from the illusory energy is
to understand Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and agree to
act according to His order.
The word moha is very important in this verse. Moha refers to that
which is opposed to knowledge. Actually real knowledge is the
understanding that every living being is eternally a servitor of the
Lord, but instead of thinking oneself in that position, the living
entity thinks that he is not a servant, that he is the master of this
material world, for he wants to lord it over the material nature. That
is his illusion. This illusion can be overcome by the mercy of the Lord
or by the mercy of a pure devotee. When that illusion is over, one
agrees to act in Krsna consciousness.
Krsna consciousness is acting according to Krsna's order. A conditioned
soul illusioned by the external energy of matter does not know that the
Supreme Lord is the master who is full of knowledge and who is the
proprietor of everything. Whatever He desires He can bestow upon His
devotees; He is the friend of everyone, and He is especially inclined
to His devotee. He is the controller of this material nature and of all
living entities. He is also the controller of inexhaustible time, and
He is full of all opulences and potencies. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead can even give Himself to the devotee. One who does not know Him
is under the spell of illusion; he does not become a devotee, but a
servitor of maya. Arjuna, however, after hearing Bhagavad-gita from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, became free from all illusion. He could
understand that Krsna was not only his friend, but the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. And he understood Krsna factually. So to study
Bhagavad-gita is to understand Krsna factually. When a person is in
full knowledge, he naturally surrenders to Krsna. When Arjuna
understood that it was Krsna's plan to reduce the unnecessary increase
of population, he agreed to fight according to Krsna's desire. He again
took up his weapons--his arrows and bow--to fight under the order of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 74
sanjaya uvaca
ity aham vasudevasya
parthasya ca mahatmanah
samvadam imam asrausam
adbhutam roma-harsanam
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; aham--I; vasudevasya--of
Krsna; parthasya--of Arjuna; ca--also; maha-atmanah--two great souls;
samvadam--discussing; imam--this; asrausam--heard; adbhutam--wonder;
roma-harsanam--hair standing on end.
TRANSLATION
Sanjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls,
Krsna and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is
standing on end.
PURPORT
In the beginning of Bhagavad-gita, Dhrtarastra inquired from his
secretary Sanjaya, "What happened in the Battlefield of Kuruksetra?"
The entire study was related to the heart of Sanjaya by the grace of
his spiritual master, Vyasa. He thus explained the theme of the
battlefield. The conversation was wonderful because such an important
conversation between two great souls never took place before and would
not take place again. It is wonderful because the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is speaking about Himself and His energies to the living
entity, Arjuna, a great devotee of the Lord. If we follow in the
footsteps of Arjuna to understand Krsna, then our life will be happy
and successful. Sanjaya realized this, and as he began to understand
it, he related the conversation to Dhrtarastra. Now it is concluded
that wherever there is Krsna and Arjuna, there is victory.
TEXT 75
vyasa-prasadac chrutavan
etad guhyam aham param
yogam yogesvarat krsnat
saksat kathayatah svayam
SYNONYMS
vyasa-prasadat--by the mercy of Vyasadeva; srutavan--heard; etat--this;
guhyam--confidential; aham--I; param--the supreme; yogam--mysticism;
yoga-isvarat--from the master of all mysticism; krsnat--from Krsna;
saksat--directly; kathayatah--speaking; svayam--personally.
TRANSLATION
By the mercy of Vyasa, I have heard these most confidential talks
directly from the master of all mysticism, Krsna, who was speaking
personally to Arjuna.
PURPORT
Vyasa was the spiritual master of Sanjaya, and Sanjaya admits that it
was by his mercy that he could understand the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. This means that one has to understand Krsna not directly but
through the medium of the spiritual master. The spiritual master is the
transparent medium, although it is true that the experience is direct.
This is the mystery of the disciplic succession. When the spiritual
master is bona fide, then one can hear Bhagavad-gita directly, as
Arjuna heard it. There are many mystics and yogis all over the world,
but Krsna is the master of all yoga systems. Krsna's instruction is
explicitly stated in Bhagavad-gita--surrender unto Krsna. One who does
so is the topmost yogi. This is confirmed in the last verse of the
Sixth Chapter. Yoginam api sarvesam.
Narada is the direct disciple of Krsna and the spiritual master of
Vyasa. Therefore Vyasa is as bona fide as Arjuna because he comes in
the disciplic succession, and Sanjaya is the direct disciple of Vyasa.
Therefore by the grace of Vyasa, his senses were purified, and he could
see and hear Krsna directly. One who directly hears Krsna can
understand this confidential knowledge. If one does not come to the
disciplic succession, he cannot hear Krsna; therefore his knowledge is
always imperfect, at least as far as understanding Bhagavad-gita is
concerned.
In Bhagavad-gita, all the yoga systems, karma-yoga, jnana-yoga and
bhakti-yoga, are explained. Krsna is the master of all such mysticism.
It is to be understood, however, that as Arjuna was fortunate enough to
understand Krsna directly, similarly, by the grace of Vyasa, Sanjaya
was also able to hear Krsna directly. Actually there is no difference
between hearing directly from Krsna and hearing directly from Krsna via
a bona fide spiritual master like Vyasa. The spiritual master is the
representative of Vyasadeva also. According to the Vedic system, on the
birthday of the spiritual master, the disciples conduct the ceremony
called Vyasa-puja.
TEXT 76
rajan samsmrtya samsmrtya
samvadam imam adbhutam
kesavarjunayoh punyam
hrsyami ca muhur muhuh
SYNONYMS
rajan--O 
King; 
samsmrtya--remembering; 
samsmrtya--remembering;
samvadam--message; imam--this; adbhutam--wonderful; kesava--Lord Krsna;
arjunayoh--and Arjuna; punyam--pious; hrsyami--taking pleasure; ca--
also; muhuh muhuh--always, repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between
Krsna and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.
PURPORT
The understanding of Bhagavad-gita is so transcendental that anyone who
becomes conversant with the topics of Arjuna and Krsna becomes
righteous, and he cannot forget such talks. This is the transcendental
position of spiritual life. In other words, one who hears the Gita from
the right source, directly from Krsna, attains full Krsna
consciousness. The result of Krsna consciousness is that one becomes
increasingly enlightened, and he enjoys life with a thrill, not only
for some time, but at every moment.
TEXT 77
tac ca samsmrtya samsmrtya
rupam aty-adbhutam hareh
vismayo me mahan rajan
hrsyami ca punah punah
SYNONYMS
tat--that; ca--also; samsmrtya--remembering; samsmrtya--remembering;
rupam--form; ati--great; adbhutam--wonderful; hareh--of Lord Krsna;
vismayah--wonder; me--my; mahan--great; rajan--O King; hrsyami--
enjoying; ca--also; punah punah--repeatedly.
TRANSLATION
O King, when I remember the wonderful form of Lord Krsna, I am struck
with even greater wonder, and I rejoice again and again.
PURPORT
It appears that Sanjaya also, by the grace of Vyasa, could see the
universal form Krsna exhibited to Arjuna. It is, of course, said that
Lord Krsna had never exhibited such a form before. It was exhibited to
Arjuna only, yet some great devotees could also see the universal form
of Krsna when it was shown to Arjuna, and Vyasa was one of them. He is
one of the great devotees of the Lord, and he is considered to be a
powerful incarnation of Krsna. Vyasa disclosed this to his disciple
Sanjaya, who remembered that wonderful form of Krsna exhibited to
Arjuna and enjoyed it repeatedly.
yatra yogesvarah krsno
yatra partho dhanur-dharah
tatra srir vijayo bhutir
dhruva nitir matir mama
SYNONYMS
yatra--where; yoga-isvarah--the master of mysticism; krsnah--Lord
Krsna; yatra--where; parthah--the son of Prtha; dhanuh-dharah--the
carrier of the bow and arrow; tatra--there; srih--opulence; vijayah--
victory; bhutih--exceptional power; dhruva--certain; nitih--morality;
matih mama--is my opinion.
TRANSLATION
Wherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever there
is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence,
victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.
PURPORT
The Bhagavad-gita began with an inquiry of Dhrtarastra. He was hopeful
of the victory of his sons, assisted by great warriors like Bhisma,
Drona and Karna. He was hopeful that the victory would be on his side.
But, after describing the scene on the battlefield, Sanjaya told the
King, "You are thinking of victory, but my opinion is that where Krsna
and Arjuna are present, there will be all good fortune." He directly
confirmed that Dhrtarastra could not expect victory for his side.
Victory was certain for the side of Arjuna because Krsna was there.
Krsna's acceptance of the post of charioteer for Arjuna was an
exhibition of another opulence. Krsna is full of all opulences, and
renunciation is one of them. There are many instances of such
renunciation, for Krsna is also the master of renunciation.
The fight was actually between Duryodhana and Yudhisthira. Arjuna was
fighting on behalf of his elder brother, Yudhisthira. Because Krsna and
Arjuna were on the side of Yudhisthira, Yudhisthira's victory was
certain. The battle was to decide who would rule the world, and Sanjaya
predicted that the power would be transferred to Yudhisthira. It is
also predicted here that Yudhisthira, after gaining victory in this
battle, would flourish more and more because he was not only righteous
and pious, but he was a strict moralist. He never spoke a lie during
his life.
There are many less intelligent persons who take Bhagavad-gita to be a
discussion of topics between two friends in a battlefield. But such a
book cannot be scripture. Some may protest that Krsna incited Arjuna to
fight, which is immoral, but the reality of the situation is clearly
stated: Bhagavad-gita is the supreme instruction in morality. The
supreme instruction of morality is stated in the Ninth Chapter, in the
thirty-fourth verse: man-mana bhava mad-bhaktah. One must become a
devotee of Krsna, and the essence of all religion is to surrender unto
Krsna, as stated, Sarva-dharman. The instructions of Bhagavad-gita
constitute the supreme process of religion and of morality. All other
processes may be purifying and may lead to this process, but the last
instruction of the Gita is the last word in all morality and religion:
surrender unto Krsna. This is the verdict of the Eighteenth Chapter.
From Bhagavad-gita we can understand that to realize oneself by
philosophical speculation and by meditation is one process, but to
fully surrender unto Krsna is the highest perfection. This is the
essence of the teachings of Bhagavad-gita. The path of regulative
principles according to the orders of social life and according to the
different courses of religion may be a confidential path of knowledge
in as far as the rituals of religion are confidential, but one is still
involved with meditation and cultivation of knowledge. Surrender unto
Krsna in devotional service in full Krsna consciousness is the most
confidential instruction and is the essence of the Eighteenth Chapter.
Another feature of Bhagavad-gita is that the actual truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Absolute Truth is realized in
three features--impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma, and the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. Perfect knowledge of the
Absolute Truth means perfect knowledge of Krsna. If one understands
Krsna, then all the departments of knowledge are part and parcel of
that understanding. Krsna is transcendental, for He is always situated
in His eternal internal potency. The living entities are manifested and
are divided into two classes, eternally conditioned and eternally
liberated. Such living entities are innumerable, and they are
considered fundamental parts of Krsna. Material energy is manifested
into twenty-four divisions. The creation is effected by eternal time,
and it is created and dissolved by external energy. This manifestation
of the cosmic world repeatedly becomes visible and invisible.
In Bhagavad-gita five principal subject matters have been discussed:
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, material nature, the living
entities, eternal time and all kinds of activities. All of these are
dependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna. All conceptions
of the Absolute Truth, namely, impersonal Brahman, localized Paramatma,
or any other transcendental conception, exist within the category of
understanding 
the 
Supreme 
Personality 
of 
Godhead. 
Although
superficially the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the living entity,
material nature and time appear to be different, nothing is different
from the Supreme. But the Supreme is always different from everything.
Lord Caitanya's philosophy is that of "inconceivably one and
different." This system of philosophy constitutes perfect knowledge of
the Absolute Truth.
The living entity in his original position is pure spirit. He is just
like an atomic particle of the Supreme Spirit. The conditioned living
entity, however, is the marginal energy of the Lord; he tends to be in
contact with both the material energy and the spiritual energy. In
other words, the living entity is situated between the two energies of
the Lord, and because he belongs to the superior energy of the Lord, he
has a particle of independence. By proper use of that independence he
comes under the direct order of Krsna. Thus he attains his normal
condition in the pleasure-giving potency.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eighteenth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of its Conclusion--the Perfection of
Renunciation.
Bhagavad-gita As It Is by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the fair use guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this
electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,
research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You can
distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more
than ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express
written permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts
in the following way: Excerpted from Bhagavad-gita As It Is by A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, www.Krishna.com.
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.