Chapter 12
Devotional Service
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
evam satata-yukta ye
bhaktas tvam paryupasate
ye capy aksaram avyaktam
tesam ke yoga-vittamah
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; evam--thus; satata--always; yuktah--
engaged; ye--those; bhaktah--devotees; tvam--unto You; paryupasate--
properly worship; ye--those; ca--also; api--again; aksaram--beyond the
senses; avyaktam--unmanifested; tesam--of them; ke--who; yoga-vit-
tamah--the most perfect.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna inquired: What is considered to be more perfect, those who are
properly engaged in Your devotional service, or those who worship the
impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?
PURPORT
Krsna has now explained about the personal, the impersonal and the
universal and has described all kinds of devotees and yogis. Generally,
the transcendentalists can be divided into two classes. One is the
impersonalist, and the other is the personalist. The personalist
devotee engages himself with all energy in the service of the Supreme
Lord. The impersonalist engages himself not directly in the service of
Krsna but in meditation on the impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested.
We find in this chapter that of the different processes for realization
of the Absolute Truth, bhakti-yoga, devotional service, is the highest.
If one at all desires to have the association of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, then he must take to devotional service.
Those who worship the Supreme Lord directly by devotional service are
called personalists. Those who engage themselves in meditation on the
impersonal Brahman are called impersonalists. Arjuna is here
questioning which position is better. There are different ways to
realize the Absolute Truth, but Krsna indicates in this chapter that
bhakti-yoga, or devotional service to Him, is highest of all. It is the
most direct, and it is the easiest means for association with the
Godhead.
In the Second Chapter the Lord explains that a living entity is not the
material body but is a spiritual spark, a part of the Absolute Truth.
In the Seventh Chapter He speaks of the living entity as part and
parcel of the supreme whole and recommends that he transfer his
attention fully to the whole. In the Eighth Chapter it is stated that
whoever thinks of Krsna at the moment of death is at once transferred
to the spiritual sky, Krsna's abode. And at the end of the Sixth
Chapter the Lord says that out of all the yogis, he who thinks of Krsna
within himself is considered to be the most perfect. So throughout the
Gita personal devotion to Krsna is recommended as the highest form of
spiritual realization. Yet there are those who are still attracted to
Krsna's impersonal  brahmajyoti effulgence, which is the all-pervasive
aspect of the Absolute Truth and which is unmanifest and beyond the
reach of the senses. Arjuna would like to know which of these two types
of transcendentalists is more perfect in knowledge. In other words, he
is clarifying his own position because he is attached to the personal
form of Krsna. He is not attached to the impersonal Brahman. He wants
to know whether his position is secure. The impersonal manifestation,
either in this material world or in the spiritual world of the Supreme
Lord, is a problem for meditation. Actually one cannot perfectly
conceive of the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth. Therefore
Arjuna wants to say, "What is the use of such a waste of time?" Arjuna
experienced in the Eleventh Chapter that to be attached to the personal
form of Krsna is best because he could thus understand all other forms
at the same time and there was no disturbance to his love for Krsna.
This important question asked of Krsna by Arjuna will clarify the
distinction between the impersonal and personal conceptions of the
Absolute Truth.
TEXT 2
sri-bhagavan uvaca
mayy avesya mano ye mam
nitya-yukta upasate
sraddhaya parayopetas
te me yuktatama matah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi--unto
Me; avesya--fixing; manah--mind; ye--one who; mam--unto Me; nitya--
always; yuktah--engaged; upasate--worships; sraddhaya--with faith;
paraya--transcendental; upetah--engages; te--they; me--Me; yukta-tamah-
-most perfect; matah--I consider.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: He whose mind is fixed on My personal form,
always engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith, is
considered by Me to be most perfect.
PURPORT
In answer to Arjuna's question, Krsna clearly says that he who
concentrates upon His personal form and who worships Him with faith and
devotion is to be considered the most perfect in yoga. For one in such
Krsna consciousness there are no material activities because everything
is done for Krsna. A pure devotee is constantly engaged. Sometimes he
chants, sometimes he hears or reads books about Krsna, or sometimes he
cooks prasadam or goes to the marketplace to purchase something for
Krsna, or sometimes he washes the temple or the dishes--whatever he
does, he does not let a single moment pass without devoting his
activities to Krsna. Such action is in full samadhi.
TEXTS 3-4
ye tv aksaram anirdesyam
avyaktam paryupasate
sarvatra-gam acintyam ca
kuta-stham acalam dhruvam
sanniyamyendriya-gramam
sarvatra sama-buddhayah
te prapnuvanti mam eva
sarva-bhuta-hite ratah
SYNONYMS
ye--those; tu--but; aksaram--which is beyond the perception of the
senses; anirdesyam--indefinite; avyaktam--unmanifested; paryupasate--
completely 
engages; 
sarvatra-gam--all-pervading; 
acintyam--
inconceivable; ca--also; kuta-stham--in the center; acalam--immovable;
dhruvam--fixed; sanniyamya--controlling; indriya-gramam--all the
senses; sarvatra--everywhere; sama-buddhayah--equally disposed; te--
they; prapnuvanti--achieve; mam--unto Me; eva--certainly; sarva-bhuta-
hite--all living entities' welfare; ratah--engaged.
TRANSLATION
But those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies beyond
the perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable, fixed
and immovable--the impersonal conception of the Absolute Truth--by
controlling the various senses and being equally disposed to everyone,
such persons, engaged in the welfare of all, at last achieve Me.
PURPORT
Those who do not directly worship the Supreme Godhead, Krsna, but who
attempt to achieve the same goal by an indirect process, also
ultimately achieve the supreme goal, Sri Krsna, as is stated, "After
many births the man of wisdom seeks refuge in Me, knowing that Vasudeva
is all." When a person comes to full knowledge after many births, he
surrenders unto Lord Krsna. If one approaches the Godhead by the method
mentioned in this verse, he has to control the senses, render service
to everyone and engage in the welfare of all beings. It is inferred
that one has to approach Lord Krsna, otherwise there is no perfect
realization. Often there is much penance involved before one fully
surrenders unto Him.
In order to perceive the Supersoul within the individual soul, one has
to cease the sensual activities of seeing, hearing, tasting, working,
etc. Then one comes to understand that the Supreme Soul is present
everywhere. Realizing this, one envies no living entity--he sees no
difference between man and animal because he sees soul only, not the
outer covering. But for the common man, this method of impersonal
realization is very difficult.
TEXT 5
kleso 'dhikataras tesam
avyaktasakta-cetasam
avyakta hi gatir duhkham
dehavadbhir avapyate
SYNONYMS
klesah--trouble; adhika-tarah--more troublesome; tesam--of them;
avyakta--to unmanifested; asakta--being attached; cetasam--of those
whose minds; avyakta--toward the unmanifested; hi--certainly; gatih
duhkham--progress is troublesome; deha-vadbhih--of the embodiments;
avapyate--achieve.
TRANSLATION
For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal
feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make
progress in that discipline is always difficult for those who are
embodied.
PURPORT
The group of transcendentalists who follow the path of the
inconceivable, unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord are
called jnana-yogis, and persons who are in full Krsna consciousness,
engaged in devotional service to the Lord, are called bhakti-yogis.
Now, here the difference between jnana-yoga and bhakti-yoga is
definitely expressed. The process of jnana-yoga, although ultimately
bringing one to the same goal, is very troublesome, whereas the path of
bhakti-yoga, the process of being in direct service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is easier and is natural for the embodied soul.
The individual soul is embodied since time immemorial. It is very
difficult for him to simply theoretically understand that he is not the
body. Therefore, the bhakti-yogi accepts the Deity of Krsna as
worshipable because there is some bodily conception fixed in the mind,
which can thus be applied. Of course, worshiping the Supreme
Personality of Godhead in His form within the temple is not idol
worship. There is evidence in the Vedic literature that worship may be
saguna and nirguna--of the Supreme possessing or not possessing
attributes. Worship of the Deity in the temple is saguna worship, for
the Lord is represented by material qualities. But the form of the
Lord, though represented by material qualities such as stone, wood or
oil paint, is not actually material. That is the absolute nature of the
Supreme Lord.
A crude example may be given here. We may find some mailboxes on the
street, and if we post our letters in those boxes, they will naturally
go to their destination without difficulty. But any old box, or an
imitation, which we may find somewhere, which is not authorized by the
post office, will not do the work. Similarly, God has an authorized
representation in the Deity form, which is called arca-vigraha. This
arca-vigraha is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord. God will accept
service through that form. The Lord is omnipotent and all-powerful;
therefore, by His incarnation as arca-vigraha, He can accept the
services of the devotee, just to make it convenient for the man in
conditioned life.
So, for a devotee, there is no difficulty in approaching the Supreme
immediately and directly, but for those who are following the
impersonal way to spiritual realization, the path is difficult. They
have to understand the unmanifested representation of the Supreme
through such Vedic literatures as the Upanisads, and they have to learn
the language, understand the nonperceptual feelings, and they have to
realize all these processes. This is not very easy for a common man. A
person in Krsna consciousness, engaged in devotional service, simply by
the guidance of the bona fide spiritual master, simply by offering
regulative obeisances unto the Deity, simply by hearing the glories of
the Lord, and simply by eating the remnants of foodstuffs offered to
the Lord, realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead very easily.
There is no doubt that the impersonalists are unnecessarily taking a
troublesome path with the risk of not realizing the Absolute Truth at
the ultimate end. But the personalist, without any risk, trouble, or
difficulty, approaches the Supreme Personality directly. A similar
passage appears in Srimad-Bhagavatam. It is stated there that if one
ultimately has to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(this surrendering process is called bhakti), but instead takes the
trouble to understand what is Brahman and what is not Brahman and
spends his whole life in that way, the result is simply troublesome.
Therefore it is advised here that one should not take up this
troublesome path of self-realization because there is uncertainty in
the ultimate result.
A living entity is eternally an individual soul, and if he wants to
merge into the spiritual whole, he may accomplish the realization of
the eternal and knowledgeable aspects of his original nature, but the
blissful portion is not realized. By the grace of some devotee, such a
transcendentalist, highly learned in the process of jnana-yoga, may
come to the point of bhakti-yoga, or devotional service. At that time,
long practice in impersonalism also becomes a source of trouble,
because he cannot give up the idea. Therefore an embodied soul is
always in difficulty with the unmanifest, both at the time of practice
and at the time of realization. Every living soul is partially
independent, and one should know for certain that this unmanifested
realization is against the nature of his spiritual blissful self. One
should not take up this process. For every individual living entity the
process of Krsna consciousness, which entails full engagement in
devotional service, is the best way. If one wants to ignore this
devotional service, there is the danger of turning to atheism. Thus
this process of centering attention on the unmanifested, the
inconceivable, which is beyond the approach of the senses, as already
expressed in this verse, should never be encouraged at any time,
especially in this age. It is not advised by Lord Krsna.
TEXTS 6-7
ye tu sarvani karmani
mayi sannyasya mat-parah
ananyenaiva yogena
mam dhyayanta upasate
tesam aham samuddharta
mrtyu-samsara-sagarat
bhavami na cirat partha
mayy avesita-cetasam
SYNONYMS
ye--one who; tu--but; sarvani--everything; karmani--activities; mayi--
unto Me; sannyasya--giving up; mat-parah--being attached to Me;
ananyena--without division; eva--certainly; yogena--by practice of such
bhakti-yoga; mam--unto Me; dhyayantah--meditating; upasate--worship;
tesam--of them; aham--I; samuddharta--deliverer; mrtyu--death; samsara-
-material existence; sagarat--from the ocean; bhavami--become; na
cirat--not a long time; partha--O son of Prtha; mayi--unto Me; avesita-
-fixed; cetasam--of those whose minds are like that.
TRANSLATION
For one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me and being
devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional service and
always meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind upon Me, O son of
Prtha--for him I am the swift deliverer from the ocean of birth and
death.
PURPORT
It is explicitly stated here that the devotees are very fortunate to be
delivered very soon from material existence by the Lord. In pure
devotional service one comes to the realization that God is great and
that the individual soul is subordinate to Him. His duty is to render
service to the Lord--if not, then he will render service to maya.
As stated before, the Supreme Lord can only be appreciated by
devotional service. Therefore, one should be fully devoted. One should
fix his mind fully on Krsna in order to achieve Him. One should work
only for Krsna. It does not matter in what kind of work one engages,
but that work should be done only for Krsna. That is the standard of
devotional service. The devotee does not desire any achievement other
than pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His life's mission is
to please Krsna, and he can sacrifice everything for Krsna's
satisfaction, just as Arjuna did in the Battle of Kuruksetra. The
process is very simple: one can devote himself in his occupation and
engage at the same time in chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Such
transcendental chanting attracts the devotee to the Personality of
Godhead.
The Supreme Lord herein promises that He will without delay deliver a
pure devotee thus engaged from the ocean of material existence. Those
who are advanced in yoga practice can willfully transfer the soul to
whatever planet they like by the yoga process, and others take the
opportunity in various ways, but as far as the devotee is concerned, it
is clearly stated here that the Lord Himself takes him. He does not
need to wait to become very experienced in order to transfer himself to
the spiritual sky.
In the Varaha Purana this verse appears:
nayami paramam sthanam
arcir-adi-gatim vina
garuda-skandham aropya
yatheccham anivaritah
The purport of this verse is that a devotee does not need to practice
astanga-yoga in order to transfer his soul to the spiritual planets.
The responsibility is taken by the Supreme Lord Himself. He clearly
states here that He Himself becomes the deliverer. A child is
completely cared for by his parents, and thus his position is secure.
Similarly, a devotee does not need to endeavor to transfer himself by
yoga practice to other planets. Rather, the Supreme Lord, by His great
mercy, comes at once, riding on His bird carrier Garuda, and at once
delivers the devotee from this material existence. Although a man who
has fallen in the ocean may struggle very hard and may be very expert
in swimming, he cannot save himself. But if someone comes and picks him
up from the water, then he is easily rescued. Similarly, the Lord picks
up the devotee from this material existence. One simply has to practice
the easy process of Krsna consciousness and fully engage himself in
devotional service. Any intelligent man should always prefer the
process of devotional service to all other paths. In the Narayaniya
this is confirmed as follows:
ya vai sadhana-sampattih
purusartha-catustaye
taya vina tad apnoti
naro narayanasrayah
The purport of this verse is that one should not engage in the
different processes of fruitive activity or cultivate knowledge by the
mental speculative process. One who is devoted to the Supreme
Personality can attain all the benefits derived from other yogic
processes, speculation, rituals, sacrifices, charities, etc. That is
the specific benediction of devotional service.
Simply by chanting the holy name of Krsna--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna,
Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--a
devotee of the Lord can approach the supreme destination easily and
happily, but this destination cannot be approached by any other process
of religion.
The conclusion of Bhagavad-gita is stated in the Eighteenth Chapter:
sarva-dharman parityajya
mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
moksayisyami ma sucah
One should give up all other processes of self-realization and simply
execute devotional service in Krsna consciousness. That will enable one
to reach the highest perfection of life. There is no need for one to
consider the sinful actions of his past life because the Supreme Lord
fully takes charge of him. Therefore one should not futilely try to
deliver himself in spiritual realization. Let everyone take shelter of
the supreme omnipotent Godhead, Krsna. That is the highest perfection
of life.
TEXT 8
mayy eva mana adhatsva
mayi buddhim nivesaya
nivasisyasi mayy eva
ata urdhvam na samsayah
SYNONYMS
mayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; manah--mind; adhatsva--fix; mayi--upon
Me; buddhim--intelligence; nivesaya--apply; nivasisyasi--you live;
mayi--unto Me; eva--certainly; atah urdhvam--thereafter; na--never;
samsayah--doubt.
TRANSLATION
Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live with Me always,
without a doubt.
PURPORT
One who is engaged in Lord Krsna's devotional service lives in a direct
relationship with the Supreme Lord, so there is no doubt that his
position is transcendental from the very beginning. A devotee does not
live on the material plane--he lives in Krsna. The holy name of the
Lord and the Lord are nondifferent; therefore when a devotee chants
Hare Krsna, Krsna and His internal potency are dancing on the tongue of
the devotee. When he offers Krsna food, Krsna directly accepts these
eatables, and the devotee becomes Krsna-ized by eating the remnants.
One who does not engage in such service cannot understand how this is
so, although this is a process recommended in the Bhagavad-gita and in
other Vedic literatures.
TEXT 9
atha cittam samadhatum
na saknosi mayi sthiram
abhyasa-yogena tato
mam icchaptum dhananjaya
SYNONYMS
atha--if, therefore; cittam--mind; samadhatum--fixing; na--not;
saknosi--able; mayi--upon Me; sthiram--fixed; abhyasa--practice;
yogena--by devotional service; tatah--therefore; mam--Me; iccha--
desire; aptum--to get; dhanam-jaya--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me
without deviation, then follow the regulative principles of bhakti-
yoga. In this way you will develop a desire to attain to Me.
PURPORT
In this verse, two different processes of bhakti-yoga are indicated.
The first applies to one who has actually developed an attachment for
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by transcendental love. And
the other is for one who has not developed an attachment for the
Supreme Person by transcendental love. For this second class there are
different prescribed rules and regulations one can follow to be
ultimately elevated to the stage of attachment to Krsna.
Bhakti-yoga is the purification of the senses. At the present moment in
material existence the senses are always impure, being engaged in sense
gratification. But, by the practice of bhakti-yoga these senses can
become purified, and in the purified state they come directly in
contact with the Supreme Lord. In this material existence, I may be
engaged in some service to some master, but I don't really lovingly
serve my master. I simply serve to get some money. And the master also
is not in love; he takes service from me and pays me. So there is no
question of love. But for spiritual life, one must be elevated to the
pure stage of love. That stage of love can be achieved by practice of
devotional service, performed with the present senses.
This love of God is now in a dormant state in everyone's heart. And,
there, love of God is manifested in different ways, but it is
contaminated by material association. Now the material association has
to be purified, and that dormant, natural love for Krsna has to be
revived. That is the whole process.
To practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga one should, under
the guidance of an expert spiritual master, follow certain principles:
one should rise early in the morning, take bath, enter the temple and
offer prayers and chant Hare Krsna, then collect flowers to offer to
the Deity, cook foodstuffs to offer to the Deity, take prasadam, and so
on. There are various rules and regulations which one should follow.
And one should constantly hear Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam from
pure devotees. This practice can help anyone to rise to the level of
love of God, and then he is sure of his progress into the spiritual
kingdom of God. This practice of bhakti-yoga, under the rules and
regulations, with the direction of a spiritual master, will surely
bring one to the stage of love of God.
TEXT 10
abhyase 'py asamartho 'si
mat-karma-paramo bhava
mad-artham api karmani
kurvan siddhim avapsyasi
SYNONYMS
abhyase--in practice of; api--even; asamarthah--unable; asi--you are;
mat-karma--My work; paramah--supreme; bhava--you become; mat-artham--
for My sake; api--even though; karmani--work; kurvan--performing;
siddhim--perfection; avapsyasi--achieve.
TRANSLATION
If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to
work for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfect
stage.
PURPORT
One who is not able even to practice the regulative principles of
bhakti-yoga, under the guidance of a spiritual master, can still be
drawn to this perfectional stage by working for the Supreme Lord. How
to do this work has already been explained in the fifty-fifth verse of
the Eleventh Chapter. One should be sympathetic to the propagation of
Krsna consciousness. There are many devotees who are engaged in the
propagation of Krsna consciousness, and they require help. So, even if
one cannot directly practice the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga,
he can try to help such work. Every endeavor requires land, capital,
organization and labor. Just as in business one requires a place to
stay, some capital to use, some labor and some organization to expand,
so the same is required in the service of Krsna. The only difference is
that in materialism one works for sense gratification. The same work,
however, can be performed for the satisfaction of Krsna, and that is
spiritual activity. If one has sufficient money, he can help in
building an office or temple for propagating Krsna consciousness. Or he
can help with publications. There are various fields of activity, and
one should be interested in such activities. If one cannot sacrifice
the results of his activities, the same person can still sacrifice some
percentage to propagate Krsna consciousness. This voluntary service to
the cause of Krsna consciousness will help one rise to a higher state
of love for God, whereupon one becomes perfect.
TEXT 11
athaitad apy asakto 'si
kartum mad-yogam asritah
sarva-karma-phala-tyagam
tatah kuru yatatmavan
SYNONYMS
atha--even though; etat--this; api--also; asaktah--unable; asi--you
are; kartum--to perform; mat--unto Me; yogam--devotional service;
asritah--refuge; sarva-karma--all activities; phala--result; tyagam--
renunciation; tatah--therefore; kuru--do; yata-atma-van--self-situated.
TRANSLATION
If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness, then try to
act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.
PURPORT
It may be that one is unable to even sympathize with the activities of
Krsna consciousness because of social, familial or religious
considerations or because of some other impediments. If one attaches
himself directly to the activities of Krsna consciousness, there may be
objections from family members, or so many other difficulties. For one
who has such a problem, it is advised that he sacrifice the accumulated
result of his activities to some good cause. Such procedures are
described in the Vedic rules. There are many descriptions of sacrifices
and special functions of punya, or special work in which the result of
one's previous action may be applied. Thus one may gradually become
elevated to the state of knowledge. It is also found that when one who
is not even interested in the activities of Krsna consciousness gives
charity to some hospital or some other social institution, he gives up
the hard-earned results of his activities. That is also recommended
here because by the practice of giving up the fruits of one's
activities one is sure to purify his mind gradually, and in that
purified stage of mind one becomes able to understand Krsna
consciousness. Of course Krsna consciousness is not dependent on any
other experience, because Krsna consciousness itself can purify one's
mind, but if there are impediments to accepting Krsna consciousness,
one may try to give up the results of his actions. In that respect,
social service, community service, national service, sacrifice for
one's country, etc., may be accepted so that some day one may come to
the stage of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord. In Bhagavad-
gita (18.46) we find it is stated, yatah pravrttir bhutanam: if one
decides to sacrifice for the supreme cause, even if he does not know
that the supreme cause is Krsna, he will come gradually to understand
that Krsna is the supreme cause by the sacrificial method.
TEXT 12
sreyo hi jnanam abhyasaj
jnanad dhyanam visisyate
dhyanat karma-phala-tyagas
tyagac chantir anantaram
SYNONYMS
sreyah--better; 
hi--certainly; 
jnanam--knowledge; 
abhyasat--by
practice; 
jnanat--better 
than 
knowledge; 
dhyanam--meditation;
visisyate--especially considered; dhyanat--from meditation; karma-
phala-tyagah--renunciation of the results of fruitive action; tyagat--
by such renunciation; santih--peace; anantaram--thereafter.
TRANSLATION
If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the
cultivation of knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is
meditation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits of
action, for by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind.
PURPORT
As mentioned in the previous verses, there are two kinds of devotional
service: the way of regulative principles and the way of full
attachment in love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For those who
are actually not able to follow the principles of Krsna consciousness
it is better to cultivate knowledge because by knowledge one can be
able to understand his real position. Gradually knowledge will develop
to the point of meditation. By meditation one can be able to understand
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by a gradual process. There are
processes which make one understand that one himself is the Supreme,
and that sort of meditation is preferred if one is unable to engage in
devotional service. If one is not able to meditate in such a way, then
there are prescribed duties, as enjoined in the Vedic literature, for
the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras, which we shall find in a
later chapter of Bhagavad-gita. But in all cases, one should give up
the result or fruits of labor; this means to employ the result of karma
for some good cause.
In summary, to reach the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest
goal, there are two processes: one process is by gradual development,
and the other process is direct. Devotional service in Krsna
consciousness is the direct method, and the other method involves
renouncing the fruits of one's activities. Then one can come to the
stage of knowledge, then to the stage of meditation, then to the stage
of understanding the Supersoul, and then to the stage of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. One may either take the step by step process or
the direct path. The direct process is not possible for everyone;
therefore the indirect process is also good. It is, however, to be
understood that the indirect process is not recommended for Arjuna
because he is already at the stage of loving devotional service to the
Supreme Lord. It is for others who are not at this stage; for them the
gradual process of renunciation, knowledge, meditation and realization
of the Supersoul and Brahman should be followed. But as far as
Bhagavad-gita is concerned, it is the direct method that is stressed.
Everyone is advised to take to the direct method and surrender unto the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXTS 13-14
advesta sarva-bhutanam
maitrah karuna eva ca
nirmamo nirahankarah
sama-duhkha-sukhah ksami
santustah satatam yogi
yatatma drdha-niscayah
mayy arpita-mano-buddhir
yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
SYNONYMS
advesta--nonenvious; sarva-bhutanam--for all living entities; maitrah--
friendly; karunah--kindly; eva--certainly; ca--also; nirmamah--with no
sense of proprietorship; nirahankarah--without false ego; sama--
equally; duhkha--distress; sukhah--happiness; ksami--forgiving;
santustah--satisfied; satatam--always; yogi--engaged in devotion; yata-
atma--self-controlled; drdha-niscayah--with determination; mayi--upon
Me; arpita--engaged; manah--mind; buddhih--intelligence; yah--one who;
mat-bhaktah--My devotee; sah me priyah--he is dear to Me.
TRANSLATION
One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities,
who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego and
equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied and
engaged in devotional service with determination and whose mind and
intelligence are in agreement with Me--he is very dear to Me.
PURPORT
Coming again to the point of pure devotional service, the Lord is
describing the transcendental qualifications of a pure devotee in these
two verses. A pure devotee is never disturbed in any circumstances. Nor
is he envious of anyone. Nor does a devotee become his enemy's enemy;
he thinks that one is acting as his enemy due to his own past misdeeds.
Thus it is better to suffer than to protest. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam
(10.14.8) it is stated: tat te 'nukampam susamiksamano. Whenever a
devotee is in distress or has fallen into difficulty, he thinks that it
is the Lord's mercy upon him. He thinks: "Thanks to my past misdeeds I
should suffer far, far greater than I am suffering now. So it is by the
mercy of the Supreme Lord that I am not getting all the punishment I am
due. I am just getting a little, by the mercy of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead." Therefore he is always calm, quiet and
patient, despite many distressful conditions. A devotee is always kind
to everyone, even to his enemy. Nirmama means that a devotee does not
attach much importance to the pains and trouble pertaining to the body
because he knows perfectly well that he is not the material body. He
does not identify with the body; therefore he is freed from the
conception of false ego and is equipoised both in happiness and
distress. He is tolerant, and he is satisfied with whatever comes by
the grace of the Supreme Lord. He does not endeavor much to achieve
something with great difficulty; therefore he is always joyful. He is a
completely perfect mystic because he is fixed in the instructions
received from the spiritual master, and because his senses are
controlled, he is determined. He is not swayed by false argument
because no one can lead him from the fixed determination of devotional
service. He is fully conscious that Krsna is the eternal Lord, so no
one can disturb him. All his qualifications enable him to depend
entirely on the Supreme Lord. Such a standard of devotional service is
undoubtedly very rare, but a devotee becomes situated in that stage by
following the regulative principles of devotional service. Furthermore,
the Lord says that such a devotee is very dear to Him, for the Lord is
always pleased with all his activities in full Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 15
yasman nodvijate loko
lokan nodvijate ca yah
harsamarsa-bhayodvegair
mukto yah sa ca me priyah
SYNONYMS
yasmat--from whom; na--never; udvijate--agitates; lokah--persons;
lokat--persons; na--never; udvijate--disturbed; ca--also; yah--anyone;
harsa--happiness; amarsa--distress; bhaya--fear; udvegaih--with
anxiety; muktah--freed; yah--who; sah--anyone; ca--also; me--Mine;
priyah--very dear.
TRANSLATION
He for whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by
anxiety, who is steady in happiness and distress, is very dear to Me.
PURPORT
A few of a devotee's qualifications are further being described. No one
is put into difficulty, anxiety, fearfulness or dissatisfaction by such
a devotee. Since a devotee is kind to everyone, he does not act in such
a way as to put others into anxiety. At the same time, if others try to
put a devotee into anxiety, he is not disturbed. It is by the grace of
the Lord that he is so practiced that he is not disturbed by any
outward disturbance. Actually because a devotee is always engrossed in
Krsna consciousness and engaged in devotional service, all such
material circumstances cannot woo him. Generally a materialistic person
becomes very happy when there is something for his sense gratification
and his body, but when he sees that others have something for their
sense gratification and he hasn't, he is sorry and envious. When he is
expecting some retaliation from an enemy, he is in a state of fear, and
when he cannot successfully execute something he becomes dejected. But
a devotee is always transcendental to all these disturbances; therefore
he is very dear to Krsna.
TEXT 16
anapeksah sucir daksa
udasino gata-vyathah
sarvarambha-parityagi
yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah
SYNONYMS
anapeksah--neutral; sucih--pure; daksah--expert; udasinah--free from
care; gata-vyathah--freed from all distress; sarva-arambha--all
endeavors; parityagi--renouncer; yah--anyone; mat-bhaktah--My devotee;
sah--he; me--Me; priyah--very dear.
TRANSLATION
A devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities,
who is pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and who does
not strive for some result, is very dear to Me.
PURPORT
Money may be offered to a devotee, but he should not struggle to
acquire it. If automatically by the grace of the Supreme, money comes
to him, he is not agitated. Naturally a devotee takes bath at least
twice in a day and rises early in the morning for devotional service.
Thus he is naturally clean both inwardly and outwardly. A devotee is
always expert because he fully knows the essence of all activities of
life and he is convinced of the authoritative scriptures. A devotee
never takes the part of a particular party; therefore he is carefree.
He is never pained, because he is free from all designations; he knows
that his body is a designation, so if there are some bodily pains, he
is free. The pure devotee does not endeavor for anything which is
against the principles of devotional service. For example, constructing
a big building requires great energy, and a devotee does not take to
such business if it does not benefit him by advancing his devotional
service. He may construct a temple for the Lord, and for that he may
take all kinds of anxiety, but he does not construct a big house for
his personal relations.
TEXT 17
yo na hrsyati na dvesti
na socati na kanksati
subhasubha-parityagi
bhaktiman yah sa me priyah
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; na--never; hrsyati--takes pleasure; na--never; dvesti--
grieves; na--never; socati--laments; na--never; kanksati--desires;
subha--auspicious; asubha--inauspicious; parityagi--renouncer; bhakti-
man--devotee; yah--one who; sah--he is; me--Mine; priyah--dear.
TRANSLATION
One who neither grasps pleasure or grief, who neither laments nor
desires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things, is
very dear to Me.
PURPORT
A pure devotee is neither happy nor distressed over material gain and
loss, nor is he very much anxious to get a son or a disciple, nor is he
distressed by not getting them. If he loses anything which is very dear
to him, he does not lament. Similarly, if he does not get that which he
desires, he is not distressed. He is transcendental in the face of all
kinds of auspicious, inauspicious and sinful activities. He is prepared
to accept all kinds of risks for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord.
Nothing is an impediment in the discharge of his devotional service.
Such a devotee is very dear to Krsna.
TEXTS 18-19
samah satrau ca mitre ca
tatha manapamanayoh
sitosna-sukha-duhkhesu
samah sanga-vivarjitah
tulya-ninda-stutir mauni
santusto yena kenacit
aniketah sthira-matir
bhaktiman me priyo narah
SYNONYMS
samah--equal; satrau--to the enemy; ca--also; mitre--to friends; ca--
also; tatha--so; mana--honor; apamanayoh--dishonor; sita--cold; usna--
heat; sukha--happiness; duhkhesu--distress; samah--equipoised; sanga-
vivarjitah--free from all association; tulya--equal; ninda--defamation;
stutih--repute; mauni--silent; santustah--satisfied; yena--somehow;
kena--or other; cit--if; aniketah--having no residence; sthira--fixed;
matih--determination; bhakti-man--engaged in devotion; me--My; priyah--
dear; narah--a man.
TRANSLATION
One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in honor and
dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame and infamy, who
is always free from contaminated association, always silent and
satisfied with anything, who doesn't care for any residence, who is
fixed in knowledge and engaged in devotional service, is very dear to
Me.
PURPORT
A devotee is always free from all bad association. Sometimes one is
praised and sometimes one is defamed; that is the nature of human
society. But a devotee is always transcendental to artificial fame and
infamy, distress or happiness. He is very patient. He does not speak of
anything but the topics about Krsna; therefore he is called silent.
Silent does not mean that one should not speak; silent means that one
should not speak nonsense. One should speak only of essentials, and the
most essential speech for the devotee is to speak of the Supreme Lord.
He is happy in all conditions; sometimes he may get very palatable
foodstuffs, sometimes not, but he is satisfied. Nor does he care for
any residential facility. He may sometimes live underneath a tree, and
he may sometimes live in a very palatial building; he is attracted to
neither. He is called fixed because he is fixed in his determination
and knowledge. We may find some repetition in the descriptions of the
qualifications of a devotee, but this is just to give an illustration
of the fact that a devotee must acquire all these qualifications.
Without good qualifications, one cannot be a pure devotee. Harav
abhaktasya kuto mahad-gunah: one who is not a devotee has no good
qualification. One who wants to be recognized as a devotee should
develop the good qualifications. Of course he does not extraneously
endeavor to acquire these qualifications, but engagement in Krsna
consciousness and devotional service automatically help him develop
them.
TEXT 20
ye tu dharmamrtam idam
yathoktam paryupasate
sraddadhana mat-parama
bhaktas te 'tiva me priyah
SYNONYMS
ye--one who; tu--but; dharma--of religion; amrtam--nectar; idam--this;
yatha--as; uktam--said; paryupasate--completely engage; sraddadhanah--
with faith; mat-paramah--taking the Supreme Lord as everything;
bhaktah--devotees; te--such persons; ativa--very, very; me--Me; priyah-
-dear.
TRANSLATION
He who follows this imperishable path of devotional service and who
completely engages himself with faith, making Me the supreme goal, is
very, very dear to Me.
PURPORT
In this chapter the religion of eternal engagement, the explanation of
the processes of transcendental service for approaching the Supreme
Lord, is given. This process is very dear to the Lord, and He accepts a
person who is engaged in such a process. The question who is better--
one who is engaged in the path of impersonal Brahman or one who is
engaged in the personal service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead--
was raised by Arjuna, and the Lord replied to him so explicitly that
there is no doubt that devotional service to the Personality of Godhead
is the best of all processes of spiritual realization. In other words,
in this chapter it is decided that through good association, one
develops attachment for pure devotional service and thereby accepts a
bona fide spiritual master and from him begins to hear and chant and
observe the regulative principles of devotional service with faith,
attachment and devotion and thus becomes engaged in the transcendental
service of the Lord. This path is recommended in this chapter;
therefore there is no doubt that devotional service is the only
absolute path for self-realization, for the attainment of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The impersonal conception of the Supreme
Absolute Truth, as described in this chapter, is recommended only up to
the time one surrenders himself for self-realization. In other words,
as long as one does not have the chance to associate with a pure
devotee, the impersonal conception may be beneficial. In the impersonal
conception of the Absolute Truth one works without fruitive result,
meditates and cultivates knowledge to understand spirit and matter.
This is necessary as long as one is not in the association of a pure
devotee. Fortunately, if one develops directly a desire to engage in
Krsna consciousness in pure devotional service, he does not need to
undergo step by step improvements in spiritual realization. Devotional
service, as described in the middle six chapters of the Bhagavad-gita,
is more congenial. One need not bother about materials to keep body and
soul together because by the grace of the Lord everything is carried
out automatically.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Twelfth Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Devotional Service.