Chapter 4
Transcendental Knowledge
TEXT 1
sri-bhagavan uvaca
imam vivasvate yogam
proktavan aham avyayam
vivasvan manave praha
manur iksvakave 'bravit
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; imam--
this; vivasvate--unto the sun-god; yogam--the science of one's
relationship to the Supreme; proktavan--instructed; aham--I; avyayam--
imperishable; vivasvan--Vivasvan (the sun-god's name); manave--unto the
father of mankind (of the name Vaivasvata); praha--told; manuh--the
father of mankind; iksvakave--unto King Iksvaku; abravit--said.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga
to the sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, the
father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to Iksvaku.
PURPORT
Herein we find the history of the Bhagavad-gita traced from a remote
time when it was delivered to the royal order, the Kings of all
planets. This science is especially meant for the protection of the
inhabitants, and therefore the royal order should understand it in
order to be able to rule the citizens and protect them from the
material bondage to lust. Human life is meant for cultivation of
spiritual knowledge, in eternal relationship with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and the executive heads of all states and all
planets are obliged to impart this lesson to the citizens by education,
culture and devotion. In other words, the executive heads of all states
are intended to spread the science of Krsna consciousness so that the
people may take advantage of this great science and pursue a successful
path, utilizing the opportunity of the human form of life.
In this millennium, the sun-god is known as Vivasvan, the king of the
sun, which is the origin of all planets within the solar system. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.52) it is stated:
yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam
raja samasta-sura-murtir asesa-tejah
yasyajnaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakro
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"Let me worship," Lord Brahma said, "the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is the original person and under whose
order the sun, which is the king of all planets, is assuming immense
power and heat. The sun represents the eye of the Lord and traverses
its orbit in obedience to His order."
The sun is the king of the planets, and the sun-god (at present of the
name Vivasvan) rules the sun planet, which is controlling all other
planets by supplying heat and light. He is rotating under the order of
Krsna, and Lord Krsna originally made Vivasvan His first disciple to
understand the science of Bhagavad-gita. The Gita is not, therefore, a
speculative treatise for the insignificant mundane scholar but is a
standard book of knowledge coming down from time immemorial.
In the Mahabharata (Santi-parva 348.51-52) we can trace out the history
of the Gita as follows:
treta-yugadau ca tato
vivasvan manave dadau
manus ca loka-bhrty-artham
sutayeksvakave dadau
iksvakuna ca kathito
vyapya lokan avasthitah
"In the beginning of the Treta-yuga [millennium] this science of the
relationship with the Supreme was delivered by Vivasvan to Manu. Manu,
being the father of mankind, gave it to his son Maharaja Iksvaku, the
king of this earth planet and forefather of the Raghu dynasty in which
Lord Ramacandra appeared." Therefore, Bhagavad-gita existed in the
human society from the time of Maharaja Iksvaku.
At the present moment we have just passed through five thousand years
of the Kali-yuga, which lasts 432,000 years. Before this there was the
Dvapara-yuga (800,000 years), and before that there was Treta-yuga
(1,200,000 years). Thus, some 2,005,000 years ago, Manu spoke the
Bhagavad-gita to his disciple and son Maharaja Iksvaku, the king of
this planet earth. The age of the current Manu is calculated to last
some 305,300,000 years, of which 120,400,000 have passed. Accepting
that before the birth of Manu the Gita was spoken by the Lord to His
disciple the sun-god Vivasvan, a rough estimate is that the Gita was
spoken at least 120,400,000 years ago; and in human society it has been
extant for two million years. It was respoken by the Lord again to
Arjuna about five thousand years ago. That is the rough estimate of the
history of the Gita, according to the Gita itself and according to the
version of the speaker, Lord Sri Krsna. It was spoken to the sun-god
Vivasvan because he is also a ksatriya and is the father of all
ksatriyas who are descendants of the sun-god, or the surya-vamsa
ksatriyas. Because Bhagavad-gita is as good as the Vedas, being spoken
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this knowledge is apauruseya,
superhuman. Since the Vedic instructions are accepted as they are,
without human interpretation, the Gita must therefore be accepted
without mundane interpretation. The mundane wranglers may speculate on
the Gita in their own ways, but that is not Bhagavad-gita as it is.
Therefore, Bhagavad-gita has to be accepted as it is, from the
disciplic succession, and it is described herein that the Lord spoke to
the sun-god, the sun-god spoke to his son Manu, and Manu spoke to his
son Iksvaku.
TEXT 2
evam parampara-praptam
imam rajarsayo viduh
sa kaleneha mahata
yogo nastah parantapa
SYNONYMS
evam--thus; parampara--disciplic succession; praptam--received; imam--
this science; raja-rsayah--the saintly kings; viduh--understood; sah--
that knowledge; kalena--in the course of time; iha--in this world;
mahata--by great; yogah--the science of one's relationship with the
Supreme; nastah--scattered; parantapa--O Arjuna, subduer of the
enemies.
TRANSLATION
This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic
succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in
course of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as
it is appears to be lost.
PURPORT
It is clearly stated that the Gita was especially meant for the saintly
kings because they were to execute its purpose in ruling over the
citizens. Certainly Bhagavad-gita was never meant for the demonic
persons, who would dissipate its value for no one's benefit and would
devise all types of interpretations according to personal whims. As
soon as the original purpose was scattered by the motives of the
unscrupulous commentators, there arose the need to reestablish the
disciplic succession. Five thousand years ago it was detected by the
Lord Himself that the disciplic succession was broken, and therefore He
declared that the purpose of the Gita appeared to be lost. In the same
way, at the present moment also there are so many editions of the Gita
(especially in English), but almost all of them are not according to
authorized disciplic succession. There are innumerable interpretations
rendered by different mundane scholars, but almost all of them do not
accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, although they make a
good business on the words of Sri Krsna. This spirit is demonic,
because demons do not believe in God but simply enjoy the property of
the Supreme. Since there is a great need of an edition of the Gita in
English, as it is received by the parampara (disciplic succession)
system, an attempt is made herewith to fulfill this great want.
Bhagavad-gita--accepted as it is--is a great boon to humanity; but if
it is accepted as a treatise of philosophical speculations, it is
simply a waste of time.
TEXT 3
sa evayam maya te 'dya
yogah proktah puratanah
bhakto 'si me sakha ceti
rahasyam hy etad uttamam
SYNONYMS
sah--the same ancient; eva--certainly; ayam--this; maya--by Me; te--
unto you; adya--today; yogah--the science of yoga; proktah--spoken;
puratanah--very old; bhaktah--devotee; asi--you are; me--My; sakha--
friend; ca--also; iti--therefore; rahasyam--mystery; hi--certainly;
etat--this; uttamam--transcendental.
TRANSLATION
That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today
told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend;
therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of this
science.
PURPORT
There are two classes of men, namely the devotee and the demon. The
Lord selected Arjuna as the recipient of this great science owing to
his being a devotee of the Lord, but for the demon it is not possible
to understand this great mysterious science. There are a number of
editions of this great book of knowledge, and some of them have
commentaries by the devotees and some of them have commentaries by the
demons. Commentation by the devotees is real, whereas that of the demon
is useless. Arjuna accepts Sri Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and any commentary on the Gita following in the footsteps of
Arjuna is real devotional service to the cause of this great science.
The demonic, however, concoct something about Krsna and mislead the
public and the general readers from the path of Krsna's instructions.
One should try to follow the disciplic succession from Arjuna, and thus
be benefited.
TEXT 4
arjuna uvaca
aparam bhavato janma
param janma vivasvatah
katham etad vijaniyam
tvam adau proktavan iti
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; aparam--junior; bhavatah--Your; janma--
birth; param--superior; janma--birth; vivasvatah--of the sun-god;
katham--how; etat--this; vijaniyam--shall I understand; tvam--You;
adau--in the beginning; proktavan--instructed; iti--thus.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: The sun-god Vivasvan is senior by birth to You. How am I
to understand that in the beginning You instructed this science to him?
PURPORT
Arjuna is an accepted devotee of the Lord, so how could he not believe
Krsna's words? The fact is that Arjuna is not inquiring for himself but
for those who do not believe in the Supreme Personality of Godhead or
for the demons who do not like the idea that Krsna should be accepted
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; for them only Arjuna inquires on
this point, as if he were himself not aware of the Personality of
Godhead, or Krsna. As it will be evident from the Tenth Chapter, Arjuna
knew perfectly well that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the fountainhead of everything and the last word in transcendence. Of
course, Krsna also appeared as the son of Devaki on this earth. How
Krsna remained the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, the eternal
original person, is very difficult for an ordinary man to understand.
Therefore, to clarify this point, Arjuna put this question before Krsna
so that He Himself could speak authoritatively. That Krsna is the
supreme authority is accepted by the whole world, not only at present,
but from time immemorial, and the demons alone reject Him. Anyway,
since Krsna is the authority accepted by all, Arjuna put this question
before Him in order that Krsna would describe Himself without being
depicted by the demons who always try to distort Him in a way
understandable to the demons and their followers. It is necessary that
everyone, for his own interest, know the science of Krsna. Therefore,
when Krsna Himself speaks about Himself, it is auspicious for all the
worlds. To the demons, such explanations by Krsna Himself may appear to
be strange because the demons always study Krsna from their own
standpoint, but those who are devotees heartily welcome the statements
of Krsna when they are spoken by Krsna Himself. The devotees will
always worship such authoritative statements of Krsna because they are
always eager to know more and more about Him. The atheists, who
consider Krsna an ordinary man, may in this way come to know that Krsna
is superhuman, that He is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha--the eternal form of
bliss and knowledge--that He is transcendental, and that He is above
the domination of the modes of material nature and above the influence
of time and space. A devotee of Krsna, like Arjuna, is undoubtedly
above any misunderstanding of the transcendental position of Krsna.
Arjuna's putting this question before the Lord is simply an attempt by
the devotee to defy the atheistic attitude of persons who consider
Krsna to be an ordinary human being, subject to the modes of material
nature.
TEXT 5
sri-bhagavan uvaca
bahuni me vyatitani
janmani tava carjuna
tany aham veda sarvani
na tvam vettha parantapa
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; bahuni--many; me--
of Mine; vyatitani--have passed; janmani--births; tava--of yours; ca--
and also; arjuna--O Arjuna; tani--all those; aham--I; veda--do know;
sarvani--all; na--not; tvam--yourself; vettha--know; parantapa--O
subduer of the enemy.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Many, many births both you and I have passed. I
can remember all of them, but you cannot, O subduer of the enemy!
PURPORT
In the Brahma-samhita (5.33) we have information of many, many
incarnations of the Lord. It is stated there:
advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam
adyam purana-purusam nava-yauvanam ca
vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
the original person--absolute, infallible, without beginning. Although
expanded into unlimited forms, still the same original, the oldest, and
the person always appearing as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful,
all-knowing forms of the Lord are usually understood by the best Vedic
scholars, but they are always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees."
It is also stated in Brahma-samhita (5.39):
ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan
nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintu
krsnah svayam samabhavat paramah puman yo
govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
"I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda [Krsna], who is
always situated in various incarnations such as Rama, Nrsimha and many
subincarnations as well, but who is the original Personality of Godhead
known as Krsna, and who incarnates personally also."
In the Vedas also it is said that the Lord, although one without a
second, manifests Himself in innumerable forms. He is like the vaidurya
stone, which changes color yet still remains one. All those multiforms
are understood by the pure, unalloyed devotees, but not by a simple
study of the Vedas (vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau). Devotees
like Arjuna are constant companions of the Lord, and whenever the Lord
incarnates, the associate devotees also incarnate in order to serve the
Lord in different capacities. Arjuna is one of these devotees, and in
this verse it is understood that some millions of years ago when Lord
Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita to the sun-god Vivasvan, Arjuna, in a
different capacity, was also present. But the difference between the
Lord and Arjuna is that the Lord remembered the incident whereas Arjuna
could not remember. That is the difference between the part-and-parcel
living entity and the Supreme Lord. Although Arjuna is addressed herein
as the mighty hero who could subdue the enemies, he is unable to recall
what had happened in his various past births. Therefore, a living
entity, however great he may be in the material estimation, can never
equal the Supreme Lord. Anyone who is a constant companion of the Lord
is certainly a liberated person, but he cannot be equal to the Lord.
The Lord is described in the Brahma-samhita as infallible (acyuta),
which means that He never forgets Himself, even though He is in
material contact. Therefore, the Lord and the living entity can never
be equal in all respects, even if the living entity is as liberated as
Arjuna. Although Arjuna is a devotee of the Lord, he sometimes forgets
the nature of the Lord, but by the divine grace a devotee can at once
understand the infallible condition of the Lord, whereas a nondevotee
or a demon cannot understand this transcendental nature. Consequently
these descriptions in the Gita cannot be understood by demonic brains.
Krsna remembered acts which were performed by Him millions of years
before, but Arjuna could not, despite the fact that both Krsna and
Arjuna are eternal in nature. We may also note herein that a living
entity forgets everything due to his change of body, but the Lord
remembers because He does not change His sac-cid-ananda body. He is
advaita, which means there is no distinction between His body and
Himself. Everything in relation to Him is spirit--whereas the
conditioned soul is different from his material body. And, because the
Lord's body and self are identical, His position is always different
from the ordinary living entity, even when He descends to the material
platform. The demons cannot adjust themselves to this transcendental
nature of the Lord, which the Lord Himself explains in the following
verse.
TEXT 6
ajo 'pi sann avyayatma
bhutanam isvaro 'pi san
prakrtim svam adhisthaya
sambhavamy atma-mayaya
SYNONYMS
ajah--unborn; 
api--although; 
san--being 
so; 
avyaya--without
deterioration; atma--body; bhutanam--all those who are born; isvarah--
the 
Supreme 
Lord; 
api--although; 
san--being 
so; 
prakrtim--
transcendental form; svam--of Myself; adhisthaya--being so situated;
sambhavami--I do incarnate; atma-mayaya--by My internal energy.
TRANSLATION
Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and
although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every
millennium in My original transcendental form.
PURPORT
The Lord has spoken about the peculiarity of His birth: although He may
appear like an ordinary person, He remembers everything of His many,
many past "births," whereas a common man cannot remember what he has
done even a few hours before. If someone is asked what he did exactly
at the same time one day earlier, it would be very difficult for a
common man to answer immediately. He would surely have to dredge his
memory to recall what he was doing exactly at the same time one day
before. And yet, men often dare claim to be God, or Krsna. One should
not be misled by such meaningless claims. Then again, the Lord explains
His prakrti, or His form. Prakrti means nature, as well as svarupa, or
one's own form. The Lord says that He appears in His own body. He does
not change His body, as the common living entity changes from one body
to another. The conditioned soul may have one kind of body in the
present birth, but he has a different body in the next birth. In the
material world, the living entity has no fixed body but transmigrates
from one body to another. The Lord, however, does not do so. Whenever
He appears, He does so in the same original body, by His internal
potency. In other words, Krsna appears in this material world in His
original eternal form, with two hands, holding a flute. He appears
exactly in His eternal body, uncontaminated by this material world.
Although He appears in the same transcendental body and is Lord of the
universe, it still appears that He takes His birth like an ordinary
living entity. Despite the fact Lord Krsna grows from childhood to
boyhood and from boyhood to youth, astonishingly enough He never ages
beyond youth. At the time of the Battle of Kuruksetra, He had many
grandchildren at home; or, in other words, He had sufficiently aged by
material calculations. Still He looked just like a young man twenty or
twenty-five years old. We never see a picture of Krsna in old age
because He never grows old like us, although He is the oldest person in
the whole creation--past, present, and future. Neither His body nor His
intelligence ever deteriorates or changes. Therefore, it is clear that
in spite of His being in the material world, He is the same unborn,
eternal form of bliss and knowledge, changeless in His transcendental
body and intelligence. Factually, His appearance and disappearance is
like the sun's rising, moving before us, and then disappearing from our
eyesight. When the sun is out of sight, we think that the sun is set,
and when the sun is before our eyes, we think that the sun is on the
horizon. Actually, the sun is always in its fixed position, but owing
to our defective, insufficient senses, we calculate the appearance and
disappearance of the sun in the sky. And, because His appearance and
disappearance are completely different from that of any ordinary,
common living entity, it is evident that He is eternal, blissful
knowledge by His internal potency--and He is never contaminated by
material nature. The Vedas also confirm that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is unborn, yet He still appears to take His birth in multi-
manifestations. The Vedic supplementary literatures also confirm that
even though the Lord appears to be taking His birth, He is still
without change of body. In the Bhagavatam, He appears before His mother
as Narayana, with four hands and the decorations of the six kinds of
full opulences. His appearance in His original eternal form is His
causeless mercy, according to the Visva-kosa dictionary. The Lord is
conscious of all of His previous appearances and disappearances, but a
common living entity forgets everything about his past body as soon as
he gets another body. He is the Lord of all living entities because He
performs wonderful and superhuman activities while He is on this earth.
Therefore, the Lord is always the same Absolute Truth and is without
differentiation between His form and self, or between His quality and
body. A question may now be raised as to why the Lord appears and
disappears in this world. This is explained in the next verse.
TEXT 7
yada yada hi dharmasya
glanir bhavati bharata
abhyutthanam adharmasya
tadatmanam srjamy aham
SYNONYMS
yada--whenever; yada--wherever; hi--certainly; dharmasya--of religion;
glanih--discrepancies; bhavati--manifested, becomes; bharata--O
descendant of Bharata; abhyutthanam--predominance; adharmasya--of
irreligion; tada--at that time; atmanam--self; srjami--manifest; aham--
I.
TRANSLATION
Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that
time I descend Myself.
PURPORT
The word srjami is significant herein. Srjami cannot be used in the
sense of creation, because, according to the previous verse, there is
no creation of the Lord's form or body, since all of the forms are
eternally existent. Therefore, srjami means that the Lord manifests
Himself as He is. Although the Lord appears on schedule, namely at the
end of the Dvapara-yuga of the twenty-eighth millennium of the seventh
Manu in one day of Brahma, still He has no obligation to adhere to such
rules and regulations, because He is completely free to act in many
ways at His will. He therefore appears by His own will whenever there
is a predominance of irreligiosity and a disappearance of true
religion. Principles of religion are laid down in the Vedas, and any
discrepancy in the matter of properly executing the rules of the Vedas
makes one irreligious. In the Bhagavatam it is stated that such
principles are the laws of the Lord. Only the Lord can manufacture a
system of religion. The Vedas are also accepted as originally spoken by
the Lord Himself to Brahma, from within his heart. Therefore, the
principles of dharma, or religion, are the direct orders of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead (dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam). These
principles are clearly indicated throughout the Bhagavad-gita. The
purpose of the Vedas is to establish such principles under the order of
the Supreme Lord, and the Lord directly orders, at the end of the Gita,
that the highest principle of religion is to surrender unto Him only,
and nothing more. The Vedic principles push one towards complete
surrender unto Him; and, whenever such principles are disturbed by the
demoniac, the Lord appears. From the Bhagavatam we understand that Lord
Buddha is the incarnation of Krsna who appeared when materialism was
rampant and materialists were using the pretext of the authority of the
Vedas. Although there are certain restrictive rules and regulations
regarding animal sacrifice for particular purposes in the Vedas, people
of demonic tendency still took to animal sacrifice without reference to
the Vedic principles. Lord Buddha appeared to stop this nonsense and to
establish the Vedic principles of nonviolence. Therefore each and every
avatara, or incarnation of the Lord, has a particular mission, and they
are all described in the revealed scriptures. No one should be accepted
as an avatara unless he is referred to by scriptures. It is not a fact
that the Lord appears only on Indian soil. He can advent Himself
anywhere and everywhere, and whenever He desires to appear. In each and
every incarnation, He speaks as much about religion as can be
understood by the particular people under their particular
circumstances. But the mission is the same--to lead people to God
consciousness and obedience to the principles of religion. Sometimes He
descends personally, and sometimes He sends His bona fide
representative in the form of His son, or servant, or Himself in some
disguised form.
The principles of Bhagavad-gita were spoken to Arjuna, and, for that
matter, to other highly elevated persons, because he was highly
advanced compared to ordinary persons in other parts of the world. Two
plus two equals four is a mathematical principle that is true both in
the beginner's arithmetic class and in the advanced class as well.
Still, there are higher and lower mathematics. In all incarnations of
the Lord, therefore, the same principles are taught, but they appear to
be higher and lower in varied circumstances. The higher principles of
religion begin with the acceptance of the four orders and the four
statuses of social life, as will be explained later. The whole purpose
of the mission of incarnations is to arouse Krsna consciousness
everywhere. Such consciousness is manifest and nonmanifest only under
different circumstances.
TEXT 8
paritranaya sadhunam
vinasaya ca duskrtam
dharma-samsthapanarthaya
sambhavami yuge yuge
SYNONYMS
paritranaya--for the deliverance; sadhunam--of the devotees; vinasaya--
for the annihilation; ca--also; duskrtam--of the miscreants; dharma--
principles 
of 
religion; 
samsthapana-arthaya--to 
reestablish;
sambhavami--I do appear; yuge--millennium; yuge--after millennium.
TRANSLATION
In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well
as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself,
millennium after millennium.
PURPORT
According to Bhagavad-gita, a sadhu (holy man) is a man in Krsna
consciousness. A person may appear to be irreligious, but if he has the
qualifications of Krsna consciousness wholly and fully, he is to be
understood to be a sadhu. And duskrtam applies to one who doesn't care
for Krsna consciousness. Such miscreants, or duskrtam, are described as
foolish and the lowest of mankind, even though they may be decorated
with mundane education; whereas another person, who is one hundred
percent engaged in Krsna consciousness, is accepted as a sadhu, even
though such a person may be neither learned nor well cultured. As far
as the atheistic are concerned, it is not necessary for the Supreme
Lord to appear as He is to destroy them, as He did with the demons
Ravana and Kamsa. The Lord has many agents who are quite competent to
vanquish demons. But the Lord especially descends to appease His
unalloyed devotees, who are always harassed by the demoniac. The demon
harasses the devotee, even though the latter may happen to be his kin.
Although Prahlada Maharaja was the son of Hiranyakasipu, he was
nonetheless persecuted by his father; although Devaki, the mother of
Krsna, was the sister of Kamsa, she and her husband Vasudeva were
persecuted only because Krsna was to be born of them. So Lord Krsna
appeared primarily to deliver Devaki, rather than kill Kamsa, but both
were performed simultaneously. Therefore it is said here that to
deliver the devotee and vanquish the demon miscreants, the Lord appears
in different incarnations.
In the Caitanya-caritamrta of Krsnadasa Kaviraja, the following verses
(Madhya 20.263-264) summarize these principles of incarnation:
srsti-hetu yei murti prapance avatare
sei isvara-murti 'avatara' nama dhare
mayatita paravyome sabara avasthana
visve avatari' dhare 'avatara' nama
"The avatara, or incarnation of Godhead, descends from the kingdom of
God for material manifestation. And the particular form of the
Personality of Godhead who so descends is called an incarnation, or
avatara. Such incarnations are situated in the spiritual world, the
kingdom of God. When they descend to the material creation, they assume
the name avatara."
There are various kinds of avataras, such as purusavataras,
gunavataras, lilavataras, sakty-avesa avataras, manvantara-avataras and
yugavataras--all appearing on schedule all over the universe. But Lord
Krsna is the primeval Lord, the fountainhead of all avataras. Lord Sri
Krsna descends for the specific purpose of mitigating the anxieties of
the pure devotees, who are very anxious to see Him in His original
Vrndavana pastimes. Therefore, the prime purpose of the Krsna avatara
is to satisfy His unalloyed devotees.
The Lord says that He incarnates Himself in every millennium. This
indicates that He incarnates also in the Age of Kali. As stated in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, the incarnation in the Age of Kali is Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who spread the worship of Krsna by the sankirtana movement
(congregational chanting of the holy names) and spread Krsna
consciousness throughout India. He predicted that this culture of
sankirtana would be broadcast all over the world, from town to town and
village to village. Lord Caitanya as the incarnation of Krsna, the
Personality of Godhead, is described secretly but not directly in the
confidential parts of the revealed scriptures, such as the Upanisads,
Mahabharata, Bhagavatam, etc. The devotees of Lord Krsna are much
attracted by the sankirtana movement of Lord Caitanya. This avatara of
the Lord does not kill the miscreants, but delivers them by His
causeless mercy.
TEXT 9
janma karma ca me divyam
evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma
naiti mam eti so 'rjuna
SYNONYMS
janma--birth; 
karma--work; 
ca--also; 
me--of 
Mine; 
divyam--
transcendental; evam--like this; yah--anyone who; vetti--knows;
tattvatah--in reality; tyaktva--leaving aside; deham--this body; punah-
-again; janma--birth; na--never; eti--does attain; mam--unto Me; eti--
does attain; sah--he; arjuna--O Arjuna.
TRANSLATION
One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material
world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.
PURPORT
The Lord's descent from His transcendental abode is already explained
in the 6th verse. One who can understand the truth of the appearance of
the Personality of Godhead is already liberated from material bondage,
and therefore he returns to the kingdom of God immediately after
quitting this present material body. Such liberation of the living
entity from material bondage is not at all easy. The impersonalists and
the yogis attain liberation only after much trouble and many, many
births. Even then, the liberation they achieve--merging into the
impersonal brahmajyoti of the Lord--is only partial, and there is the
risk of returning again to this material world. But the devotee, simply
by understanding the transcendental nature of the body and activities
of the Lord, attains the abode of the Lord after ending this body and
does not run the risk of returning again to this material world. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.33) it is stated that the Lord has many, many forms
and incarnations: advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam. Although there
are many transcendental forms of the Lord, they are still one and the
same Supreme Personality of Godhead. One has to understand this fact
with conviction, although it is incomprehensible to mundane scholars
and empiric philosophers. As stated in the Vedas (Purusa-bodhini
Upanisad):
eko devo nitya-lilanurakto
bhakta-vyapi hrdy antar-atma
"The one Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternally engaged in many,
many transcendental forms in relationships with His unalloyed
devotees." This Vedic version is confirmed in this verse of the Gita
personally by the Lord. He who accepts this truth on the strength of
the authority of the Vedas and of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and who does not waste time in philosophical speculations attains the
highest perfectional stage of liberation. Simply by accepting this
truth on faith, one can, without a doubt, attain liberation. The Vedic
version, tat tvam asi, is actually applied in this case. Anyone who
understands Lord Krsna to be the Supreme, or who says unto the Lord
"You are the same Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead," is
certainly liberated instantly, and consequently his entrance into the
transcendental association of the Lord is guaranteed. In other words,
such a faithful devotee of the Lord attains perfection, and this is
confirmed by the following Vedic assertion:(Svetasvatara Upanisad 3.8)
tam eva viditvati mrtyum eti
nanyah pantha vidyate 'yanaya
One can attain the perfect stage of liberation from birth and death
simply by knowing the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There
is no alternative because anyone who does not understand Lord Krsna as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is surely in the mode of ignorance.
Consequently he will not attain salvation simply, so to speak, by
licking the outer surface of the bottle of honey, or by interpreting
the Bhagavad-gita according to mundane scholarship. Such empiric
philosophers may assume very important roles in the material world, but
they are not necessarily eligible for liberation. Such puffed-up
mundane scholars have to wait for the causeless mercy of the devotee of
the Lord. One should therefore cultivate Krsna consciousness with faith
and knowledge, and in this way attain perfection.
TEXT 10
vita-raga-bhaya-krodha
man-maya mam upasritah
bahavo jnana-tapasa
puta mad-bhavam agatah
SYNONYMS
vita--freed from; raga--attachment; bhaya--fear; krodhah--anger; mat-
maya--fully in Me; mam--unto Me; upasritah--being fully situated;
bahavah--many; jnana--knowledge; tapasa--by penance; putah--being
purified; mat-bhavam--transcendental love for Me; agatah--attained.
TRANSLATION
Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me
and taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past became purified
by knowledge of Me--and thus they all attained transcendental love for
Me.
PURPORT
As described above, it is very difficult for a person who is too
materially affected to understand the personal nature of the Supreme
Absolute Truth. Generally, people who are attached to the bodily
conception of life are so absorbed in materialism that it is almost
impossible for them to understand that there is a transcendental body
which is imperishable, full of knowledge and eternally blissful. In the
materialistic concept, the body is perishable, full of ignorance and
completely miserable. Therefore, people in general keep this same
bodily idea in mind when they are informed of the personal form of the
Lord. For such materialistic men, the form of the gigantic material
manifestation is supreme. Consequently they consider the Supreme to be
impersonal. And because they are too materially absorbed, the
conception of retaining the personality after liberation from matter
frightens them. When they are informed that spiritual life is also
individual and personal, they become afraid of becoming persons again,
and so they naturally prefer a kind of merging into the impersonal
void. Generally, they compare the living entities to the bubbles of the
ocean, which merge into the ocean. That is the highest perfection of
spiritual existence attainable without individual personality. This is
a kind of fearful stage of life, devoid of perfect knowledge of
spiritual existence. Furthermore there are many persons who cannot
understand spiritual existence at all. Being embarrassed by so many
theories and by contradictions of various types of philosophical
speculation, they become disgusted or angry and foolishly conclude that
there is no supreme cause and that everything is ultimately void. Such
people are in a diseased condition of life. Some people are too
materially attached and therefore do not give attention to spiritual
life, some of them want to merge into the supreme spiritual cause, and
some of them disbelieve in everything, being angry at all sorts of
spiritual speculation out of hopelessness. This last class of men take
to the shelter of some kind of intoxication, and their affective
hallucinations are sometimes accepted as spiritual vision. One has to
get rid of all three stages of attachment to the material world,
negligence of spiritual life, fear of a spiritual personal identity,
and the conception of void that underlies the frustration of life. To
get free from these three stages of the material concept of life, one
has to take complete shelter of the Lord, guided by the bona fide
spiritual master, and follow the disciplines and regulative principles
of devotional life. The last stage of the devotional life is called
bhava, or transcendental love of Godhead.
According to Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.4.15-16), the science of
devotional service:
adau sraddha tatah sadhu-
sango 'tha bhajana-kriya
tato 'nartha-nivrttih syat
tato nistha rucis tatah
athasaktis tato bhavas
tatah premabhyudancati
sadhakanam ayam premnah
pradurbhave bhavet kramah
"In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-
realization. This will bring one to the stage of trying to associate
with persons who are spiritually elevated. In the next stage one
becomes initiated by an elevated spiritual master, and under his
instruction the neophyte devotee begins the process of devotional
service. By execution of devotional service under the guidance of the
spiritual master, one becomes free from all material attachment,
attains steadiness in self-realization, and acquires a taste for
hearing about the Absolute Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. This
taste leads one further forward to attachment for Krsna consciousness,
which is matured in bhava, or the preliminary stage of transcendental
love of God. Real love for God is called prema, the highest
perfectional stage of life." In the prema stage there is constant
engagement in the transcendental loving service of the Lord. So, by the
slow process of devotional service, under the guidance of the bona fide
spiritual master, one can attain the highest stage, being freed from
all material attachment, from the fearfulness of one's individual
spiritual personality, and from the frustrations resulting from void
philosophy. Then one can ultimately attain to the abode of the Supreme
Lord.
TEXT 11
ye yatha mam prapadyante
tams tathaiva bhajamy aham
mama vartmanuvartante
manusyah partha sarvasah
SYNONYMS
ye--all of them; yatha--as; mam--unto Me; prapadyante--surrender; tan--
unto them; tatha--so; eva--certainly; bhajami--do I reward; aham--I;
mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--do follow; manusyah--all men;
partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in all respects.
TRANSLATION
All of them--as they surrender unto Me--I reward accordingly. Everyone
follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha.
PURPORT
Everyone is searching for Krsna in the different aspects of His
manifestations. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is partially
realized in His impersonal brahmajyoti effulgence and as the all-
pervading Supersoul dwelling within everything, including the particles
of atoms. But Krsna is only fully realized by His pure devotees.
Consequently, Krsna is the object of everyone's realization, and thus
anyone and everyone is satisfied according to one's desire to have Him.
In the transcendental world also, Krsna reciprocates with His pure
devotees in the transcendental attitude, just as the devotee wants Him.
One devotee may want Krsna as supreme master, another as his personal
friend, another as his son, and still another as his lover. Krsna
rewards all the devotees equally, according to their different
intensities of love for Him. In the material world, the same
reciprocations of feelings are there, and they are equally exchanged by
the Lord with the different types of worshipers. The pure devotees both
here and in the transcendental abode associate with Him in person and
are able to render personal service to the Lord and thus derive
transcendental bliss in His loving service. As for those who are
impersonalists and who want to commit spiritual suicide by annihilating
the individual existence of the living entity, Krsna helps also by
absorbing them into His effulgence. Such impersonalists do not agree to
accept the eternal, blissful Personality of Godhead; consequently they
cannot relish the bliss of transcendental personal service to the Lord,
having extinguished their individuality. Some of them, who are not
situated even in the impersonal existence, return to this material
field to exhibit their dormant desires for activities. They are not
admitted into the spiritual planets, but they are again given a chance
to act on the material planets. For those who are fruitive workers, the
Lord awards the desired results of their prescribed duties, as the
yajnesvara; and those who are yogis seeking mystic powers are awarded
such powers. In other words, everyone is dependent for success upon His
mercy alone, and all kinds of spiritual processes are but different
degrees of success on the same path. Unless, therefore, one comes to
the highest perfection of Krsna consciousness, all attempts remain
imperfect, as is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.3.10):
akamah sarva-kamo va
moksa-kama udara-dhih
tivrena bhakti-yogena
yajeta purusam param
"Whether one is without desire [the condition of the devotees], or is
desirous of all fruitive results, or is after liberation, one should
with all efforts try to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead for
complete perfection, culminating in Krsna consciousness."
TEXT 12
kanksantah karmanam siddhim
yajanta iha devatah
ksipram hi manuse loke
siddhir bhavati karma-ja
SYNONYMS
kanksantah--desiring; karmanam--of fruitive activities; siddhim--
perfection; yajante--worship by sacrifices; iha--in the material world;
devatah--the demigods; ksipram--very quickly; hi--certainly; manuse--in
human society; loke--within this world; siddhih bhavati--becomes
successful; karma-ja--the fruitive worker.
TRANSLATION
Men in this world desire success in fruitive activities, and therefore
they worship the demigods. Quickly, of course, men get results from
fruitive work in this world.
PURPORT
There is a great misconception about the gods or demigods of this
material world, and men of less intelligence, although passing as great
scholars, take these demigods to be various forms of the Supreme Lord.
Actually, the demigods are not different forms of God, but they are
God's different parts and parcels. God is one, and the parts and
parcels are many. The Vedas say, nityo nityanam: God is one. Isvarah
paramah krsnah. The Supreme God is one--Krsna--and the demigods are
delegated with powers to manage this material world. These demigods are
all living entities (nityanam) with different grades of material power.
They cannot be equal to the Supreme God--Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna.
Anyone who thinks that God and the demigods are on the same level is
called an atheist, or pasandi. Even the great demigods like Brahma and
Siva cannot be compared to the Supreme Lord. In fact, the Lord is
worshiped by demigods such as Brahma and Siva (siva-virinci-nutam). Yet
curiously enough there are many human leaders who are worshiped by
foolish men under the misunderstanding of anthropomorphism or
zoomorphism. Iha devatah denotes a powerful man or demigod of this
material world. But Narayana, Visnu, or Krsna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, does not belong to this world. He is above, or
transcendental to, material creation. Even Sripada Sankaracarya, the
leader of the impersonalists, maintains that Narayana, or Krsna, is
beyond this material creation. However, foolish people (hrta-jnana)
worship the demigods because they want immediate results. They get the
results, but do not know that results so obtained are temporary and are
meant for less intelligent persons. The intelligent person is in Krsna
consciousness, and he has no need to worship the paltry demigods for
some immediate, temporary benefit. The demigods of this material world,
as well as their worshipers, will vanish with the annihilation of this
material world. The boons of the demigods are material and temporary.
Both the material worlds and their inhabitants, including the demigods,
and their worshipers, are bubbles in the cosmic ocean. In this world,
however, human society is mad after temporary things such as the
material opulence of possessing land, family and enjoyable
paraphernalia. To achieve such temporary things, they worship the
demigods or powerful men in human society. If a man gets some
ministership in the government by worshiping a political leader, he
considers that he has achieved a great boon. All of them are therefore
kowtowing to the so-called leaders or "big guns" in order to achieve
temporary boons, and they indeed achieve such things. Such foolish men
are not interested in Krsna consciousness for the permanent solution to
the hardships of material existence. They are all after sense
enjoyment, and to get a little facility for sense enjoyment they are
attracted to worship empowered living entities known as demigods. This
verse indicates that people are rarely interested in Krsna
consciousness. They are mostly interested in material enjoyment, and
therefore they worship some powerful living entity.
TEXT 13
catur-varnyam maya srstam
guna-karma-vibhagasah
tasya kartaram api mam
viddhy akartaram avyayam
SYNONYMS
catuh-varnyam--the four divisions of human society; maya--by Me;
srstam--created; guna--quality; karma--work; vibhagasah--in terms of
division; tasya--of that; kartaram--the father; api--although; mam--Me;
viddhi--you may know; akartaram--as the non-doer; avyayam--being
unchangeable.
TRANSLATION
According to the three modes of material nature and the work ascribed
to them, the four divisions of human society were created by Me. And,
although I am the creator of this system, you should know that I am yet
the non-doer, being unchangeable.
PURPORT
The Lord is the creator of everything. Everything is born of Him,
everything is sustained by Him, and everything, after annihilation,
rests in Him. He is therefore the creator of the four divisions of the
social order, beginning with the intelligent class of men, technically
called brahmanas due to their being situated in the mode of goodness.
Next is the administrative class, technically called the ksatriyas due
to their being situated in the mode of passion. The mercantile men,
called the vaisyas, are situated in the mixed modes of passion and
ignorance, and the sudras, or laborer class, are situated in the
ignorant mode of material nature. In spite of His creating the four
divisions of human society, Lord Krsna does not belong to any of these
divisions, because He is not one of the conditioned souls, a section of
whom form human society. Human society is similar to any other animal
society, but to elevate men from the animal status, the above-mentioned
divisions are created by the Lord for the systematic development of
Krsna consciousness. The tendency of a particular man toward work is
determined by the modes of material nature which he has acquired. Such
symptoms of life, according to different modes of material nature, are
described in the Eighteenth Chapter of this book. A person in Krsna
consciousness, however, is above even the brahmanas, because a brahmana
by quality is supposed to know about Brahman, the Supreme Absolute
Truth. Most of them approach the impersonal Brahman manifestation of
Lord Krsna, but only a man who transcends the limited knowledge of a
brahmana and reaches the knowledge of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna, becomes a person in Krsna consciousness--or,
in other words, a Vaisnava. Krsna consciousness includes knowledge of
all different plenary expansions of Krsna, namely Rama, Nrsimha,
Varaha, etc. However, as Krsna is transcendental to this system of the
four divisions of human society, a person in Krsna consciousness is
also transcendental to all divisions of human society, whether we
consider the divisions of community, nation or species.
TEXT 14
na mam karmani limpanti
na me karma-phale sprha
iti mam yo 'bhijanati
karmabhir na sa badhyate
SYNONYMS
na--never; mam--unto Me; karmani--all kinds of work; limpanti--do
affect; na--nor; me--My; karma-phale--in fruitive action; sprha--
aspiration; iti--thus; mam--unto Me; yah--one who; abhijanati--does
know; karmabhih--by the reaction of such work; na--never does; sah--he;
badhyate--becomes entangled.
TRANSLATION
There is no work that affects Me; nor do I aspire for the fruits of
action. One who understands this truth about Me also does not become
entangled in the fruitive reactions of work.
PURPORT
As there are constitutional laws in the material world stating that the
king can do no wrong, or that the king is not subject to the state
laws, similarly the Lord, although He is the creator of this material
world, is not affected by the activities of the material world. He
creates and remains aloof from the creation, whereas the living
entities are entangled in the fruitive results of material activities
because of their propensity for lording it over material resources. The
proprietor of an establishment is not responsible for the right and
wrong activities of the workers, but the workers are themselves
responsible. The living entities are engaged in their respective
activities of sense gratification, and these activities are not
ordained by the Lord. For advancement of sense gratification, the
living entities are engaged in the work of this world, and they aspire
to heavenly happiness after death. The Lord, being full in Himself, has
no attraction for so-called heavenly happiness. The heavenly demigods
are only His engaged servants. The proprietor never desires the low-
grade happiness such as the workers may desire. He is aloof from the
material actions and reactions. For example, the rains are not
responsible for different types of vegetation that appear on the earth,
although without such rains there is no possibility of vegetative
growth. Vedic smrti confirms this fact as follows:
nimitta-matram evasau
srjyanam sarga-karmani
pradhana-karani-bhuta
yato vai srjya-saktayah
"In the material creations, the Lord is only the supreme cause. The
immediate cause is material nature by which the cosmic manifestation is
visible." The created beings are of many varieties, such as the
demigods, human beings and lower animals, and all of them are subject
to the reactions of their past good or bad activities. The Lord only
gives them the proper facilities for such activities and the
regulations of the modes of nature, but He is never responsible for
their past and present activities. In the Vedanta-sutra (2.1.34) it is
confirmed, vaisamya-nairghrnye na sapeksatvat: the Lord is never
partial to any living entity. The living entity is responsible for his
own acts. The Lord only gives him facilities, through the agency of
material nature, the external energy. Anyone who is fully conversant
with all the intricacies of this law of karma, or fruitive activities,
does not become affected by the results of his activities. In other
words, the person who understands this transcendental nature of the
Lord is an experienced man in Krsna consciousness, and thus he is never
subjected to the laws of karma. One who does not know the
transcendental nature of the Lord and who thinks that the activities of
the Lord are aimed at fruitive results, as are the activities of the
ordinary living entities, certainly becomes entangled himself in
fruitive reaction. One who knows the Supreme Truth is a liberated soul
fixed in Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 15
evam jnatva krtam karma
purvair api mumuksubhih
kuru karmaiva tasmat tvam
purvaih purvataram krtam
SYNONYMS
evam--thus; jnatva--knowing well; krtam--performed; karma--work;
purvaih--by past authorities; api--although; mumuksubhih--who attained
liberation; kuru--just perform; karma--prescribed duty; eva--certainly;
tasmat--therefore; tvam--you; purvaih--by the predecessors; purva-
taram--ancient predecessors; krtam--as performed.
TRANSLATION
All the liberated souls in ancient times acted with this understanding
and so attained liberation. Therefore, as the ancients, you should
perform your duty in this divine consciousness.
PURPORT
There are two classes of men. Some of them are full of polluted
material things within their hearts, and some of them are materially
free. Krsna consciousness is equally beneficial for both of these
persons. Those who are full of dirty things can take to the line of
Krsna consciousness for a gradual cleansing process, following the
regulative principles of devotional service. Those who are already
cleansed of the impurities may continue to act in the same Krsna
consciousness so that others may follow their exemplary activities and
thereby be benefited. Foolish persons or neophytes in Krsna
consciousness often want to retire from activities without having
knowledge of Krsna consciousness. Arjuna's desire to retire from
activities on the battlefield was not approved by the Lord. One need
only know how to act. To retire from the activities of Krsna
consciousness and to sit aloof making a show of Krsna consciousness, is
less important than actually engaging in the field of activities for
the sake of Krsna. Arjuna is here advised to act in Krsna
consciousness, following in the footsteps of the Lord's previous
disciples, such as the sun-god Vivasvan, as mentioned hereinbefore. The
Supreme Lord knows all His past activities, as well as those of persons
who acted in Krsna consciousness in the past. Therefore He recommends
the acts of the sun-god, who learned this art from the Lord some
millions of years before. All such students of Lord Krsna are mentioned
here as past liberated persons, engaged in the discharge of duties
allotted by Krsna.
TEXT 16
kim karma kim akarmeti
kavayo 'py atra mohitah
tat te karma pravaksyami
yaj jnatva moksyase 'subhat
SYNONYMS
kim--what is; karma--action; kim--what is; akarma--inaction; iti--thus;
kavayah--the intelligent; api--also; atra--in this matter; mohitah--
bewildered; tat--that; te--unto you; karma--work; pravaksyami--I shall
explain; yat--which; jnatva--knowing; moksyase--be liberated; asubhat--
from ill fortune.
TRANSLATION
Even the intelligent are bewildered in determining what is action and
what is inaction. Now I shall explain to you what action is knowing
which you shall be liberated from all sins.
PURPORT
Action in Krsna consciousness has to be executed in accord with the
examples of previous bona fide devotees. This is recommended in the
15th verse. Why such action should not be independent will be explained
in the text to follow.
To act in Krsna consciousness, one has to follow the leadership of
authorized persons who are in a line of disciplic succession as
explained in the beginning of this chapter. The system of Krsna
consciousness was first narrated to the sun-god, the sun-god explained
it to his son Manu, Manu explained it to his son Iksvaku, and the
system is current on this earth from that very remote time. Therefore,
one has to follow in the footsteps of previous authorities in the line
of disciplic succession. Otherwise even the most intelligent men will
be bewildered regarding the standard actions of Krsna consciousness.
For this reason, the Lord decided to instruct Arjuna in Krsna
consciousness directly. Because of the direct instruction of the Lord
to Arjuna, anyone who follows in the footsteps of Arjuna is certainly
not bewildered.
It is said that one cannot ascertain the ways of religion simply by
imperfect experimental knowledge. Actually the principles of religion
can only be laid down by the Lord Himself. Dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-
pranitam (Bhag. 6.3.19). No one can manufacture a religious principle
by imperfect speculation. One must follow in the footsteps of great
authorities like Brahma, Siva, Narada, Manu, the Kumaras, Kapila,
Prahlada, Bhisma, Sukadeva Gosvami, Yamaraja, Janaka, Bali Maharaja,
etc. By mental speculation one cannot ascertain what is religion or
self-realization. Therefore, out of causeless mercy to His devotees,
the Lord explains directly to Arjuna what action is and what inaction
is. Only action performed in Krsna consciousness can deliver a person
from the entanglement of material existence.
TEXT 17
karmano hy api boddhavyam
boddhavyam ca vikarmanah
akarmanas ca boddhavyam
gahana karmano gatih
SYNONYMS
karmanah--working order; hi--certainly; api--also; boddhavyam--should
be understood; boddhavyam--to be understood; ca--also; vikarmanah--
forbidden work; akarmanah--inaction; ca--also; boddhavyam--should be
understood; gahana--very difficult; karmanah--working order; gatih--to
enter in to.
TRANSLATION
The intricacies of action are very hard to understand. Therefore one
should know properly what action is, what forbidden action is, and what
inaction is.
PURPORT
If one is serious about liberation from material bondage, one has to
understand the distinctions between action, inaction and unauthorized
actions. One has to apply oneself to such an analysis of action,
reaction and perverted actions because it is a very difficult subject
matter. To understand Krsna consciousness and action according to the
modes, one has to learn one's relationship with the Supreme; i.e., one
who has learned perfectly knows that every living entity is the eternal
servitor of the Lord and that consequently one has to act in Krsna
consciousness. The entire Bhagavad-gita is directed toward this
conclusion. Any other conclusions, against this consciousness and its
attendant reactions, are vikarmas, or prohibited actions. To understand
all this one has to associate with authorities in Krsna consciousness
and learn the secret from them; this is as good as learning from the
Lord directly. Otherwise, even the most intelligent person will be
bewildered.
TEXT 18
karmany akarma yah pasyed
akarmani ca karma yah
sa buddhiman manusyesu
sa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt
SYNONYMS
karmani--in action; akarma--inaction; yah--one who; pasyet--observes;
akarmani--in inaction; ca--also; karma--fruitive action; yah--one who;
sah--he; buddhi-man--is intelligent; manusyesu--in human society; sah--
he; yuktah--in the transcendental position; krtsna-karma-krt--although
engaged in all activities.
TRANSLATION
One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent
among men, and he is in the transcendental position, although engaged
in all sorts of activities.
PURPORT
A person acting in Krsna consciousness is naturally free from the bonds
of karma. His activities are all performed for Krsna; therefore he does
not enjoy or suffer any of the effects of work. Consequently he is
intelligent in human society, even though he is engaged in all sorts of
activities for Krsna. Akarma means without reaction to work. The
impersonalist ceases fruitive activities out of fear, so that the
resultant action may not be a stumbling block on the path of self-
realization, but the personalist knows rightly his position as the
eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore he
engages himself in the activities of Krsna consciousness. Because
everything is done for Krsna, he enjoys only transcendental happiness
in the discharge of this service. Those who are engaged in this process
are known to be without desire for personal sense gratification. The
sense of eternal servitorship to Krsna makes one immune to all sorts of
reactionary elements of work.
TEXT 19
yasya sarve samarambhah
kama-sankalpa-varjitah
jnanagni-dagdha-karmanam
tam ahuh panditam budhah
SYNONYMS
yasya--one whose; sarve--all sorts of; samarambhah--in all attempts;
kama--desire for sense gratification; sankalpa--determination;
varjitah--are devoid of; jnana--of perfect knowledge; agni--fire;
dagdha--being burnt by; karmanam--the performer; tam--him; ahuh--
declare; panditam--learned; budhah--of those who know.
TRANSLATION
One is understood to be in full knowledge whose every act is devoid of
desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be a worker for
whose fruitive action is burned up by the fire of perfect knowledge.
PURPORT
Only a person in full knowledge can understand the activities of a
person in Krsna consciousness. Because the person in Krsna
consciousness is devoid of all kinds of sense-gratificatory
propensities, it is to be understood that he has burned up the
reactions of his work by perfect knowledge of his constitutional
position as the eternal servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
He is actually learned who has attained to such perfection of
knowledge. Development of this knowledge of the eternal servitorship to
the Lord is compared to fire. Such a fire, once kindled, can burn up
all kinds of reactions to work.
TEXT 20
tyaktva karma-phalasangam
nitya-trpto nirasrayah
karmany abhipravrtto 'pi
naiva kincit karoti sah
SYNONYMS
tyaktva--having given up; karma-phala-asangam--attachment for fruitive
results; nitya--always; trptah--being satisfied; nirasrayah--without
any shelter; karmani--in activity; abhipravrttah--being fully engaged;
api--in spite of; na--does not; eva--certainly; kincit--anything;
karoti--do; sah--he.
TRANSLATION
Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever
satisfied and independent, he performs no fruitive action, although
engaged in all kinds of undertakings.
PURPORT
This freedom from the bondage of actions is possible only in Krsna
consciousness when one is doing everything for Krsna. A Krsna conscious
person acts out of pure love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and therefore he has no attraction for the results of the action. He is
not even attached to his personal maintenance, for everything is left
to Krsna. Nor is he anxious to secure things, nor to protect things
already in his possession. He does his duty to his best ability and
leaves everything to Krsna. Such an unattached person is always free
from the resultant reactions of good and bad; it is as though he were
not doing anything. This is the sign of akarma, or actions without
fruitive reactions. Any other action, therefore, devoid of Krsna
consciousness, is binding upon the worker, and that is the real aspect
of vikarma, as explained hereinbefore.
TEXT 21
nirasir yata-cittatma
tyakta-sarva-parigrahah
sariram kevalam karma
kurvan napnoti kilbisam
SYNONYMS
nirasih--without desire for the result; yata--controlled; citta-atma--
mind and intelligence; tyakta--giving up; sarva--all; parigrahah--sense
of proprietorship over all possessions; sariram--in keeping body and
soul together; kevalam--only; karma--work; kurvan--doing so; na--never;
apnoti--does acquire; kilbisam--sinful reactions.
TRANSLATION
Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly
controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions
and acts only for the bare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not
affected by sinful reactions.
PURPORT
A Krsna conscious person does not expect good or bad results in his
activities. His mind and intelligence are fully controlled. He knows
that because he is part and parcel of the Supreme and therefore the
part played by him, as a part and parcel of the whole, is not by his
choice but is chosen for him by the Supreme and is done only through
His agency. When the hand moves, it does not move out of its own
accord, but by the endeavor of the whole body. A Krsna conscious person
is always dovetailed with the supreme desire, for he has no desire for
personal sense gratification. He moves exactly like a part of a
machine. As a machine part requires oiling and cleaning for
maintenance, similarly, a Krsna conscious man maintains himself by his
work just to remain fit for action in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. He is therefore immune to all the reactions of his
endeavors. Like an animal, he has no proprietorship even over his own
body. A cruel proprietor of an animal sometimes kills the animal in his
possession, yet the animal does not protest. Nor does it have any real
independence. A Krsna conscious person, fully engaged in self-
realization, has very little time to falsely possess any material
object. For maintaining body and soul, he does not require unfair means
of accumulating money. He does not, therefore, become contaminated by
such material sins. He is free from all reactions to his actions.
TEXT 22
yadrccha-labha-santusto
dvandvatito vimatsarah
samah siddhav asiddhau ca
krtvapi na nibadhyate
SYNONYMS
yadrccha--out of its own accord; labha--gain; santustah--satisfied;
dvandva--duality; atitah--surpassed; vimatsarah--free from envy; samah-
-steady; siddhau--in success; asiddhau--failure; ca--also; krtva--
doing; api--although; na--never; nibadhyate--is affected.
TRANSLATION
He who is satisfied with gain which comes of its own accord, who is
free from duality and does not envy, who is steady both in success and
failure, is never entangled, although performing actions.
PURPORT
A Krsna conscious person does not make much endeavor even to maintain
his body. He is satisfied with gains which are obtained of their own
accord. He neither begs nor borrows, but he labors honestly as far as
is in his power, and is satisfied with whatever is obtained by his own
honest labor. He is therefore independent in his livelihood. He does
not allow anyone's service to hamper his own service in Krsna
consciousness. However, for the service of the Lord he can participate
in any kind of action without being disturbed by the duality of the
material world. The duality of the material world is felt in terms of
heat and cold, or misery and happiness. A Krsna conscious person is
above duality because he does not hesitate to act in any way for the
satisfaction of Krsna. Therefore he is steady both in success and in
failure. These signs are visible when one is fully in transcendental
knowledge.
TEXT 23
gata-sangasya muktasya
jnanavasthita-cetasah
yajnayacaratah karma
samagram praviliyate
SYNONYMS
gata-sangasya--unattached to the modes of material nature; muktasya--of
the liberated; jnana-avasthita--situated in transcendence; cetasah--of
such wisdom; yajnaya--for the sake of Yajna (Krsna); acaratah--so
active; karma--work; samagram--in total; praviliyate--merges entirely.
TRANSLATION
The work of a man who is unattached to the modes of material nature and
who is fully situated in transcendental knowledge merges entirely into
transcendence.
PURPORT
Becoming fully Krsna conscious, one is freed from all dualities and
thus is free from the contaminations of the material modes. He can
become liberated because he knows his constitutional position in
relationship with Krsna; and thus his mind cannot be drawn from Krsna
consciousness. Consequently, whatever he does, he does for Krsna who is
the primeval Visnu. Therefore, all his works are technically sacrifices
because sacrifice involves satisfying the Supreme Person, Krsna. The
resultant reactions to all such work certainly merge into
transcendence, and one does not suffer material effects.
TEXT 24
brahmarpanam brahma havir
brahmagnau brahmana hutam
brahmaiva tena gantavyam
brahma-karma-samadhina
SYNONYMS
brahma--spiritual in nature; arpanam--contribution; brahma--the
Supreme; havih--butter; brahma--spiritual; agnau--in the fire of
consummation; brahmana--by the spirit soul; hutam--offered; brahma--
spiritual kingdom; eva--certainly; tena--by him; gantavyam--to be
reached; brahma--spiritual; karma--activities; samadhina--by complete
absorption.
TRANSLATION
A person who is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness is sure to attain
the spiritual kingdom because of his full contribution to spiritual
activities, in which the consummation is absolute and that which is
offered is of the same spiritual nature.
PURPORT
How activities in Krsna consciousness can lead one ultimately to the
spiritual goal is described here. There are various activities in Krsna
consciousness, and all of them will be described in the following
verses. But, for the present, just the principle of Krsna consciousness
is described. A conditioned soul, entangled in material contamination,
is sure to act in the material atmosphere, and yet he has to get out of
such an environment. The process by which the conditioned soul can get
out of the material atmosphere is Krsna consciousness. For example, a
patient who is suffering from a disorder of the bowels due to
overindulgence in milk products is cured by another milk product,
namely curds. The materially absorbed conditioned soul can be cured by
Krsna consciousness as set forth here in the Gita. This process is
generally known as yajna, or activities (sacrifices) simply meant for
the satisfaction of Visnu, or Krsna. The more the activities of the
material world are performed in Krsna consciousness, or for Visnu only,
the more the atmosphere becomes spiritualized by complete absorption.
Brahman means spiritual. The Lord is spiritual, and the rays of His
transcendental body are called brahmajyoti, His spiritual effulgence.
Everything that exists is situated in that brahmajyoti, but when the
jyoti is covered by illusion (maya) or sense gratification, it is
called material. This material veil can be removed at once by Krsna
consciousness; thus the offering for the sake of Krsna consciousness,
the consuming agent of such an offering or contribution, the process of
consumption, the contributor, and the result are--all combined
together--Brahman, or the Absolute Truth. The Absolute Truth covered by
maya is called matter. Matter dovetailed for the cause of the Absolute
Truth regains its spiritual quality. Krsna consciousness is the process
of converting the illusory consciousness into Brahman, or the Supreme.
When the mind is fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness, it is said to
be in samadhi, or trance. Anything done in such transcendental
consciousness is called yajna, or sacrifice for the Absolute. In that
condition 
of 
spiritual 
consciousness, 
the 
contributor, 
the
contribution, the consumption, the performer or leader of the
performance, and the result or ultimate gain--everything--becomes one
in the Absolute, the Supreme Brahman. That is the method of Krsna
consciousness.
TEXT 25
daivam evapare yajnam
yoginah paryupasate
brahmagnav apare yajnam
yajnenaivopajuhvati
SYNONYMS
daivam--in worshiping the demigods; eva--like this; apare--some;
yajnam--sacrifices; 
yoginah--the 
mystics; 
paryupasate--worship
perfectly; brahma--the Absolute Truth; agnau--in the fire of; apare--
others; 
yajnam--sacrifice; 
yajnena--by 
sacrifice; 
eva--thus;
upajuhvati--worship.
TRANSLATION
Some yogis perfectly worship the demigods by offering different
sacrifices to them, and some of them offer sacrifices in the fire of
the Supreme Brahman.
PURPORT
As described above, a person engaged in discharging duties in Krsna
consciousness is also called a perfect yogi or a first-class mystic.
But there are others also, who perform similar sacrifices in the
worship of demigods, and still others who sacrifice to the Supreme
Brahman, or the impersonal feature of the Supreme Lord. So there are
different kinds of sacrifices in terms of different categories. Such
different categories of sacrifice by different types of performers only
superficially demark varieties of sacrifice. Factual sacrifice means to
satisfy the Supreme Lord, Visnu, who is also known as Yajna. All the
different varieties of sacrifice can be placed within two primary
divisions: namely, sacrifice of worldly possessions and sacrifice in
pursuit of transcendental knowledge. Those who are in Krsna
consciousness sacrifice all material possessions for the satisfaction
of the Supreme Lord, while others, who want some temporary material
happiness, sacrifice their material possessions to satisfy demigods
such as Indra, the sun-god, etc. And others, who are impersonalists,
sacrifice their identity by merging into the existence of impersonal
Brahman. The demigods are powerful living entities appointed by the
Supreme Lord for the maintenance and supervision of all material
functions like the heating, watering and lighting of the universe.
Those who are interested in material benefits worship the demigods by
various sacrifices according to the Vedic rituals. They are called
bahv-isvara-vadi, or believers in many gods. But others, who worship
the impersonal feature of the Absolute Truth and regard the forms of
the demigods as temporary, sacrifice their individual selves in the
supreme fire and thus end their individual existences by merging into
the existence of the Supreme. Such impersonalists spend their time in
philosophical speculation to understand the transcendental nature of
the Supreme. In other words, the fruitive workers sacrifice their
material possessions for material enjoyment, whereas the impersonalist
sacrifices his material designations with a view to merging into the
existence of the Supreme. For the impersonalist, the fire altar of
sacrifice is the Supreme Brahman, and the offering is the self being
consumed by the fire of Brahman. The Krsna conscious person, like
Arjuna, however, sacrifices everything for the satisfaction of Krsna,
and thus all his material possessions as well as his own self--
everything--is sacrificed for Krsna. Thus, he is the first-class yogi;
but he does not lose his individual existence.
TEXT 26
srotradinindriyany anye
samyamagnisu juhvati
sabdadin visayan anya
indriyagnisu juhvati
SYNONYMS
srotra-adini--hearing process; indriyani--senses; anye--others;
samyama--of restraint; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--offers; sabda-
adin--sound vibration, etc.; visayan--objects of sense gratification;
anye--others; indriya--of sense organs; agnisu--in the fire; juhvati--
sacrifice.
TRANSLATION
Some sacrifice the hearing process and the senses in the fire of the
controlled mind, and others sacrifice the objects of the senses, such
as sound, in the fire of the sacrifice.
PURPORT
The four divisions of human life, namely the brahmacari, the grhastha,
the vanaprastha, and the sannyasi, are all meant to become perfect
yogis or transcendentalists. Since human life is not meant for our
enjoying sense gratification like the animals, the four orders of human
life are so arranged that one may become perfect in spiritual life. The
brahmacaris, or students under the care of a bona fide spiritual
master, control the mind by abstaining from sense gratification. They
are referred to in this verse as sacrificing the hearing process and
the senses in the fire of the controlled mind. A brahmacari hears only
words concerning Krsna consciousness; hearing is the basic principle
for understanding, and therefore the pure brahmacari engages fully in
harer namanukirtanam--chanting and hearing the glories of the Lord. He
restrains himself from the vibrations of material sounds, and his
hearing is engaged in the transcendental sound vibration of Hare Krsna,
Hare Krsna. Similarly, the householders, who have some license for
sense gratification, perform such acts with great restraint. Sex life,
intoxication and meat eating are general tendencies of human society,
but a regulated householder does not indulge in unrestricted sex life
and other sense gratification. Marriage on principles of religious life
is therefore current in all civilized human society because that is the
way for restricted sex life. This restricted, unattached sex life is
also a kind of yajna because the restricted householder sacrifices his
general tendency toward sense gratification for higher transcendental
life.
TEXT 27
sarvanindriya-karmani
prana-karmani capare
atma-samyama-yogagnau
juhvati jnana-dipite
SYNONYMS
sarvani--all; indriya--senses; karmani--functions; prana-karmani--
functions of the life breath; ca--also; apare--others; atma-samyama--
controlling the mind; yoga--linking process; agnau--in the fire of;
juhvati--offers; jnana-dipite--because of the urge for self-
realization.
TRANSLATION
Those who are interested in self-realization, in terms of mind and
sense control, offer the functions of all the senses, as well as the
vital force [breath], as oblations into the fire of the controlled
mind.
PURPORT
The yoga system conceived by Patanjali is referred to herein. In the
Yoga-sutra of Patanjali, the soul is called pratyag-atma and parag-
atma. As long as the soul is attached to sense enjoyment, it is called
parag-atma. The soul is subjected to the functions of ten kinds of air
at work within the body, and this is perceived through the breathing
system. The Patanjali system of yoga instructs one on how to control
the functions of the body's air in a technical manner so that
ultimately all the functions of the air within become favorable for
purifying the soul of material attachment. According to this yoga
system, pratyag-atma is the ultimate goal. This pratyag-atma is a
withdrawal from activities in matter. The senses interact with the
sense objects, like the ear for hearing, eyes for seeing, nose for
smelling, tongue for tasting, hand for touching, and all of them are
thus engaged in activities outside the self. They are called the
functions of the prana-vayu. The apana-vayu goes downwards, vyana-vayu
acts to shrink and expand, samana-vayu adjusts equilibrium, udana-vayu
goes upwards--and when one is enlightened, one engages all these in
searching for self-realization.
TEXT 28
dravya-yajnas tapo-yajna
yoga-yajnas tathapare
svadhyaya-jnana-yajnas ca
yatayah samsita-vratah
SYNONYMS
dravya-yajnah--sacrificing one's possessions; tapah-yajnah--sacrifice
in austerities; yoga-yajnah--sacrifice in eightfold mysticism; tatha--
thus; apare--others; svadhyaya--sacrifice in the study of the Vedas;
jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in advancement of transcendental knowledge; ca-
-also; yatayah--enlightened; samsita--taken to strict; vratah--vows.
TRANSLATION
There are others who, enlightened by sacrificing their material
possessions in severe austerities, take strict vows and practice the
yoga of eightfold mysticism, and others study the Vedas for the
advancement of transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
These sacrifices may be fitted into various divisions. There are
persons who are sacrificing their possessions in the form of various
kinds of charities. In India, the rich mercantile community or princely
orders open various kinds of charitable institutions like dharma-sala,
anna-ksetra, atithi-sala, anathalaya, vidya-pitha, etc. In other
countries, too, there are many hospitals, old age homes and similar
charitable foundations meant for distributing food, education and
medical treatment free to the poor. All these charitable activities are
called dravyamaya-yajna. There are others who, for higher elevation in
life or for promotion to higher planets within the universe,
voluntarily accept many kinds of austerities such as candrayana and
caturmasya. These processes entail severe vows for conducting life
under certain rigid rules. For example, under the caturmasya vow the
candidate does not shave for four months during the year (July to
October), he does not eat certain foods, does not eat twice in a day
and does not leave home. Such sacrifice of the comforts of life is
called tapomaya-yajna. There are still others who engage themselves in
different kinds of mystic yogas like the Patanjali system (for merging
into the existence of the Absolute), or hatha-yoga or astanga-yoga (for
particular perfections). And some travel to all the sanctified places
of pilgrimage. All these practices are called yoga-yajna, sacrifice for
a certain type of perfection in the material world. There are others
who engage themselves in the studies of different Vedic literatures,
specifically the Upanisads and Vedanta-sutras, or the Sankhya
philosophy. All of these are called svadhyaya-yajna. or engagement in
the sacrifice of studies. All these yogis are faithfully engaged in
different types of sacrifice and are seeking a higher status of life.
Krsna consciousness, is,  however, different from these because it is
the direct service of the Supreme Lord. Krsna consciousness cannot be
attained by any one of the above-mentioned types of sacrifices but can
be attained only by the mercy of the Lord and His bona fide devotee.
Therefore, Krsna consciousness is transcendental.
TEXT 29
apane juhvati pranam
prane 'panam tathapare
pranapana-gati ruddhva
pranayama-parayanah
apare niyataharah
pranan pranesu juhvati
SYNONYMS
apane--air which acts downward; juhvati--offers; pranam--air which acts
outward; prane--in the air going outward; apanam--air going downward;
tatha--as also; apare--others; prana--air going outward; apana--air
going downward; gati--movement; ruddhva--checking; prana-ayama--trance
induced by stopping all breathing; parayanah--so inclined; apare--
others; niyata--controlled; aharah--eating; pranan--outgoing air;
pranesu--in the outgoing air; juhvati--sacrifices.
TRANSLATION
And there are even others who are inclined to the process of breath
restraint to remain in trance, and they practice stopping the movement
of the outgoing breath into the incoming, and incoming breath into the
outgoing, and thus at last remain in trance, stopping all breathing.
Some of them, curtailing the eating process, offer the outgoing breath
into itself, as a sacrifice.
PURPORT
This system of yoga for controlling the breathing process is called
pranayama, and in the beginning it is practiced in the hatha-yoga
system through different sitting postures. All of these processes are
recommended for controlling the senses and for advancement in spiritual
realization. This practice involves controlling the air within the body
to enable simultaneous passage in opposite directions. The apana air
goes downward, and the prana air goes up. The pranayama-yogi practices
breathing the opposite way until the currents are neutralized into
puraka, equilibrium. Similarly, when the exhaled breathing is offered
to the inhaled breathing, it is called recaka. When both air currents
are completely stopped, it is called kumbhaka-yoga. By practice of
kumbhaka-yoga, the yogis increase the duration of life by many, many
years. A Krsna conscious person, however, being always situated in the
transcendental loving service of the Lord, automatically becomes the
controller of the senses. His senses, being always engaged in the
service of Krsna, have no chance of becoming otherwise engaged. So at
the end of life, he is naturally transferred to the transcendental
plane of Lord Krsna; consequently he makes no attempt to increase his
longevity. He is at once raised to the platform of liberation. A Krsna
conscious person begins from the transcendental stage, and he is
constantly in that consciousness. Therefore, there is no falling down,
and ultimately he enters into the abode of the Lord without delay. The
practice of reduced eating is automatically done when one eats only
krsna-prasadam, or food which is offered first to the Lord. Reducing
the eating process is very helpful in the matter of sense control. And
without sense control there is no possibility of getting out of
material entanglement.
TEXT 30
sarve 'py ete yajna-vido
yajna-ksapita-kalmasah
yajna-sistamrta-bhujo
yanti brahma sanatanam
SYNONYMS
sarve--all; api--although apparently different; ete--all these; yajna-
vidah--conversant with the purpose of performing; yajna--sacrifices;
ksapita--being cleansed as the result of such performances; kalmasah--
sinful reactions; yajna-sista--as a result of such performances of
yajna; amrta-bhujah--those who have tasted such nectar; yanti--do
approach; brahma--the supreme; sanatanam--eternal atmosphere.
TRANSLATION
All these performers who know the meaning of sacrifice become cleansed
of sinful reaction, and, having tasted the nectar of the results of
such sacrifice, they go to the supreme eternal atmosphere.
PURPORT
From the foregoing explanation of different types of sacrifice (namely
sacrifice of one's possessions, study of the Vedas or philosophical
doctrines, and performance of the yoga system), it is found that the
common aim of all is to control the senses. Sense gratification is the
root cause of material existence; therefore, unless and until one is
situated on a platform apart from sense gratification, there is no
chance of being elevated to the eternal platform of full knowledge,
full bliss and full life. This platform is in the eternal atmosphere,
or Brahman atmosphere. All the above-mentioned sacrifices help one to
become cleansed of the sinful reactions of material existence. By this
advancement in life, one not only becomes happy and opulent in this
life, but also, at the end, he enters into the eternal kingdom of God,
either merging into the impersonal Brahman or associating with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna.
TEXT 31
nayam loko 'sty ayajnasya
kuto 'nyah kuru-sattama
SYNONYMS
na--never; ayam--this; lokah--planet; asti--there is; ayajnasya--of the
foolish; kutah--where is; anyah--the other; kuru-sat-tama--O best
amongst the Kurus.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kuru dynasty, without sacrifice one can never live
happily on this planet or in this life: what then of the next?
PURPORT
Whatever form of material existence one is in, one is invariably
ignorant of his real situation. In other words, existence in the
material world is due to the multiple reactions to our sinful lives.
Ignorance is the cause of sinful life, and sinful life is the cause of
one's dragging on in material existence. The human form of life is the
only loophole by which one may get out of this entanglement. The Vedas,
therefore, give us a chance for escape by pointing out the paths of
religion, economic comfort, regulated sense gratification and, at last,
the means to get out of the miserable condition entirely. The path of
religion, or the different kinds of sacrifice recommended above,
automatically solves our economic problems. By performance of yajna we
can have enough food, enough milk, etc.--even if there is a so-called
increase of population. When the body is fully supplied, naturally the
next stage is to satisfy the senses. The Vedas prescribe, therefore,
sacred marriage for regulated sense gratification. Thereby one is
gradually elevated to the platform of release from material bondage,
and the highest perfection of liberation is to associate with the
Supreme Lord. Perfection is achieved by performance of yajna
(sacrifice), as described above. Now, if a person is not inclined to
perform yajna according to the Vedas, how can he expect a happy life?
There are different grades of material comforts in different heavenly
planets, and in all cases there is immense happiness for persons
engaged in different kinds of yajna. But the highest kind of happiness
that a man can achieve is to be promoted to the spiritual planets by
practice of Krsna consciousness. A life of Krsna consciousness is
therefore the solution to all the problems of material existence.
TEXT 32
evam bahu-vidha yajna
vitata brahmano mukhe
karma-jan viddhi tan sarvan
evam jnatva vimoksyase
SYNONYMS
evam--thus; bahu-vidhah--various kinds of; yajnah--sacrifices; vitatah-
-widespread; brahmanah--of the Vedas; mukhe--in the face of; karma-jan-
-born of work; viddhi--you should know; tan--then; sarvan--all; evam--
thus; jnatva--knowing; vimoksyase--be liberated.
TRANSLATION
All these different types of sacrifice are approved by the Vedas, and
all of them are born of different types of work. Knowing them as such,
you will become liberated.
PURPORT
Different types of sacrifice, as discussed above, are mentioned in the
Vedas to suit the different types of worker. Because men are so deeply
absorbed in the bodily concept, these sacrifices are so arranged that
one can work either with the body, the mind, or the intelligence. But
all of them are recommended for ultimately bringing about liberation
from the body. This is confirmed by the Lord herewith from His own
mouth.
TEXT 33
sreyan dravya-mayad yajnaj
jnana-yajnah parantapa
sarvam karmakhilam partha
jnane parisamapyate
SYNONYMS
sreyan--greater; dravya-mayat--than the sacrifice of material
possessions; yajnat--knowledge; jnana-yajnah--sacrifice in knowledge;
parantapa--O chastiser of the enemy; sarvam--all; karma--activities;
akhilam--in totality; partha--O son of Prtha; jnane--in knowledge;
parisamapyate--ends in.
TRANSLATION
O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than
the sacrifice of material possessions. O son of Prtha, after all, the
sacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge.
PURPORT
The purpose of all sacrifices is to arrive at the status of complete
knowledge, then to gain release from material miseries, and,
ultimately, to engage in loving transcendental service to the Supreme
Lord (Krsna consciousness). Nonetheless, there is a mystery about all
these different activities of sacrifice, and one should know this
mystery. Sacrifices sometimes take different forms according to the
particular faith of the performer. When one's faith reaches the stage
of transcendental knowledge, the performer of sacrifices should be
considered more advanced than those who simply sacrifice material
possessions without such knowledge, for without attainment of
knowledge, sacrifices remain on the material platform and bestow no
spiritual benefit. Real knowledge culminates in Krsna consciousness,
the highest stage of transcendental knowledge. Without the elevation of
knowledge, sacrifices are simply material activities. When, however,
they are elevated to the level of transcendental knowledge, all such
activities enter onto the spiritual platform. Depending on differences
in consciousness, sacrificial activities are sometimes called karma-
kanda, fruitive activities, and sometimes jnana-kanda, knowledge in the
pursuit of truth. It is better when the end is knowledge.
TEXT 34
tad viddhi pranipatena
pariprasnena sevaya
upadeksyanti te jnanam
jnaninas tattva-darsinah
SYNONYMS
tat--that knowledge of different sacrifices; viddhi--try to understand;
pranipatena--by approaching a spiritual master; pariprasnena--by
submissive 
inquiries; 
sevaya--by 
the 
rendering 
of 
service;
upadeksyanti--initiate; te--unto you; jnanam--knowledge; jnaninah--the
self-realized; tattva--truth; darsinah--the seers.
TRANSLATION
Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized
soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth.
PURPORT
The path of spiritual realization is undoubtedly difficult. The Lord
therefore advises us to approach a bona fide spiritual master in the
line of disciplic succession from the Lord Himself. No one can be a
bona fide spiritual master without following this principle of
disciplic succession. The Lord is the original spiritual master, and a
person in the disciplic succession can convey the message of the Lord
as it is to his disciple. No one can be spiritually realized by
manufacturing his own process, as is the fashion of the foolish
pretenders. The Bhagavatam (6.3.19) says, dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-
pranitam--the path of religion is directly enunciated by the Lord.
Therefore, mental speculation or dry arguments cannot help one progress
in spiritual life. One has to approach a bona fide spiritual master to
receive the knowledge. Such a spiritual master should be accepted in
full surrender, and one should serve the spiritual master like a menial
servant, without false prestige. Satisfaction of the self-realized
spiritual master is the secret of advancement in spiritual life.
Inquiries and submission constitute the proper combination for
spiritual understanding. Unless there is submission and service,
inquiries from the learned spiritual master will not be effective. One
must be able to pass the test of the spiritual master, and when he sees
the genuine desire of the disciple, he automatically blesses the
disciple with genuine spiritual understanding. In this verse, both
blind following and absurd inquiries are condemned. One should not only
hear submissively from the spiritual master, but one must also get a
clear understanding from him, in submission and service and inquiries.
A bona fide spiritual master is by nature very kind toward the
disciple. Therefore when the student is submissive and is always ready
to render service, the reciprocation of knowledge and inquiries becomes
perfect.
TEXT 35
yaj jnatva na punar moham
evam yasyasi pandava
yena bhutany asesani
draksyasy atmany atho mayi
SYNONYMS
yat--which; jnatva--knowing; na--never; punah--again; moham--illusion;
evam--like this; yasyasi--you shall go; pandava--O son of Pandu; yena--
by which; bhutani--all living entities; asesani--totally; draksyasi--
you will see; atmani--in the Supreme Soul; atho--or in other words;
mayi--in Me.
TRANSLATION
And when you have thus learned the truth, you will know that all living
beings are but part of Me--and that they are in Me, and are Mine.
PURPORT
The result of receiving knowledge from a self-realized soul, or one who
knows things as they are, is learning that all living beings are parts
and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna. The
sense of a separated existence from Krsna is called maya (ma--not, ya--
this). Some think that we have nothing to do with Krsna, that Krsna is
only a great historical personality and that the Absolute is the
impersonal Brahman. Factually, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gita,
this impersonal Brahman is the personal effulgence of Krsna. Krsna, as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the cause of everything. In the
Brahma-samhita it is clearly stated that Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. Even the millions of
incarnations are only His different expansions. Similarly, the living
entities are also expansions of Krsna. The Mayavadi philosophers
wrongly think that Krsna loses His own separate existence in His many
expansions. This thought is material in nature. We have experience in
the material world that a thing, when fragmentally distributed, loses
its own original identity. But the Mayavadi philosophers fail to
understand that absolute means that one plus one is equal to one, and
that one minus one is also equal to one. This is the case in the
absolute world.
For want of sufficient knowledge in the absolute science, we are now
covered with illusion, and therefore we think that we are separate from
Krsna. Although we are separated parts of Krsna, we are nevertheless
not different from Him. The bodily difference of the living entities is
maya, or not actual fact. We are all meant to satisfy Krsna. By maya
alone Arjuna thought that the temporary bodily relationship with his
kinsmen was more important than his eternal spiritual relationship with
Krsna. The whole teaching of the Gita is targeted toward this end: that
a living being, as His eternal servitor, cannot be separated from
Krsna, and his sense of being an identity apart from Krsna is called
maya. The living entities, as separate parts and parcels of the
Supreme, have a purpose to fulfill. Having forgotten that purpose,
since time immemorial, they are situated in different bodies, as men,
animals, demigods, etc. Such bodily differences arise from
forgetfulness of the transcendental service of the Lord. But when one
is engaged in transcendental service through Krsna consciousness, one
becomes at once liberated from this illusion. One can acquire such pure
knowledge only from the bona fide spiritual master and thereby avoid
the delusion that the living entity is equal to Krsna. Perfect
knowledge is that the Supreme Soul, Krsna, is the supreme shelter for
all living entities, and giving up such shelter, the living entities
are deluded by the material energy, imagining themselves to have a
separate identity. Thus, under different standards of material
identity, they become forgetful of Krsna. When, however, such deluded
living entities become situated in Krsna consciousness, it is to be
understood that they are on the path of liberation, as confirmed in the
Bhagavatam (2.10.6): muktir hitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih.
Liberation means to be situated in one's constitutional position as the
eternal servitor of Krsna (Krsna consciousness).
TEXT 36
api ced asi papebhyah
sarvebhyah papa-krt-tamah
sarvam jnana-plavenaiva
vrjinam santarisyasi
SYNONYMS
api--even; cet--if; asi--you are; papebhyah--of sinners; sarvebhyah--of
all; papa-krt-tamah--the greatest sinner; sarvam--all such sinful
actions; jnana-plavena--by the boat of transcendental knowledge; eva--
certainly; vrjinam--the ocean of miseries; santarisyasi--you will cross
completely.
TRANSLATION
Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will be
able to cross over the ocean of miseries.
PURPORT
Proper understanding of one's constitutional position in relationship
to Krsna is so nice that it can at once lift one from the struggle for
existence which goes on in the ocean of nescience. This material world
is sometimes regarded as an ocean of nescience and sometimes as a
blazing forest. In the ocean, however expert a swimmer one may be, the
struggle for existence is very severe. If someone comes forward and
lifts the struggling swimmer from the ocean, he is the greatest savior.
Perfect knowledge, received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
the path of liberation. The boat of Krsna consciousness is very simple,
but at the same time the most sublime.
TEXT 37
yathaidhamsi samiddho 'gnir
bhasma-sat kurute 'rjuna
jnanagnih sarva-karmani
bhasma-sat kurute tatha
SYNONYMS
yatha--just as; edhamsi--firewood; samiddhah--blazing; agnih--fire;
bhasma-sat--turns into ashes; kurute--so does; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnana-
agnih--the fire of knowledge; sarva-karmani--all reactions to material
activities; bhasma-sat--to ashes; kurute--it so does; tatha--similarly.
TRANSLATION
As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the fire
of knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.
PURPORT
Perfect knowledge of self and Superself and of their relationship is
compared herein to fire. This fire not only burns up all reactions to
impious activities, but also all reactions to pious activities, turning
them to ashes. There are many stages of reaction: reaction in the
making, reaction fructifying, reaction already achieved, and reaction a
priori. But knowledge of the constitutional position of the living
entity burns everything to ashes. When one is in complete knowledge,
all reactions, both a priori and a posteriori, are consumed. In the
Vedas (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.4.22) it is stated, ubhe uhaivaisa ete
taraty amrtah sadhv-asadhuni: "One overcomes both the pious and impious
reactions of work."
TEXT 38
na hi jnanena sadrsam
pavitram iha vidyate
tat svayam yoga-samsiddhah
kalenatmani vindati
SYNONYMS
na--never; hi--certainly; jnanena--with knowledge; sadrsam--in
comparison; pavitram--sanctified; iha--in this world; vidyate--exists;
tat--that; svayam--himself; yoga--in devotion; samsiddhah--matured;
kalena--in course of time; atmani--in himself; vindati--enjoys.
TRANSLATION
In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendental
knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And one
who has achieved this enjoys the self with himself in due course of
time.
PURPORT
When we speak of transcendental knowledge, we do so in terms of
spiritual understanding. As such, there is nothing so sublime and pure
as transcendental knowledge. Ignorance is the cause of our bondage, and
knowledge is the cause of our liberation. This knowledge is the mature
fruit of devotional service, and when one is situated in transcendental
knowledge, he need not search for peace elsewhere, for he enjoys peace
within himself. In other words, this knowledge and peace culminate in
Krsna consciousness. That is the last word in the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 39
sraddhaval labhate jnanam
tat-parah samyatendriyah
jnanam labdhva param santim
acirenadhigacchati
SYNONYMS
sraddha-van--a faithful man; labhate--achieves; jnanam--knowledge; tat-
parah--very much attached to it; samyata--controlled; indriyah--senses;
jnanam--knowledge; labdhva--having achieved; param--transcendental;
santim--peace; acirena--very soon; adhigacchati--attains.
TRANSLATION
A faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and who
subdues his senses quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace.
PURPORT
Such knowledge in Krsna consciousness can be achieved by a faithful
person who believes firmly in Krsna. One is called a faithful man who
thinks that, simply by acting in Krsna consciousness, he can attain the
highest perfection. This faith is attained by the discharge of
devotional service, and by chanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna
Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, which
cleanses one's heart of all material dirt. Over and above this, one
should control the senses. A person who is faithful to Krsna and who
controls the senses can easily attain perfection in the knowledge of
Krsna consciousness without delay.
TEXT 40
ajnas casraddadhanas ca
samsayatma vinasyati
nayam loko 'sti na paro
na sukham samsayatmanah
SYNONYMS
ajnah--fools who have no knowledge in standard scriptures; ca--and;
asraddadhanah--without faith in revealed scriptures; ca--also; samsaya-
-doubts; atma--a person; vinasyati--falls back; na--never; ayam--this;
lokah--world; asti--there is; na--neither; parah--next life; na--not;
sukham--happiness; samsaya--doubtful; atmanah--of the person.
TRANSLATION
But ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed scriptures do
not attain God consciousness. For the doubting soul there is happiness
neither in this world nor in the next.
PURPORT
Out of many standard and authoritative revealed scriptures, the
Bhagavad-gita is the best. Persons who are almost like animals have no
faith in, or knowledge of the standard revealed scriptures; and some,
even though they have knowledge of, or can cite passages from, the
revealed scriptures, have actually no faith in these words. And even
though others may have faith in scriptures like Bhagavad-gita, they do
not believe in or worship the Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Such
persons cannot have any standing in Krsna consciousness. They fall
down. Out of all the above-mentioned persons, those who have no faith
and are always doubtful make no progress at all. Men without faith in
God and His revealed word find no good in this world, nor in the next.
For them there is no happiness whatsoever. One should therefore follow
the principles of revealed scriptures with faith and thereby be raised
to the platform of knowledge. Only this knowledge will help one become
promoted to the transcendental platform of spiritual understanding. In
other words, doubtful persons have no status whatsoever in spiritual
emancipation. One should therefore follow in the footsteps of great
acaryas who are in the disciplic succession and thereby attain success.
TEXT 41
yoga-sannyasta-karmanam
jnana-sanchinna-samsayam
atmavantam na karmani
nibadhnanti dhananjaya
SYNONYMS
yoga--devotional service in karma-yoga; sannyasta--renounced; karmanam-
-of the performers; jnana--knowledge; sanchinna--cut by the advancement
of knowledge; samsayam--doubts; atma-vantam--situated in the self; na--
never; karmani--work; nibadhnanti--do bind up; dhananjaya--O conqueror
of riches.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, one who has renounced the fruits of his action, whose doubts
are destroyed by transcendental knowledge, and who is situated firmly
in the self, is not bound by works, O conqueror of riches.
PURPORT
One who follows the instruction of the Gita, as it is imparted by the
Lord, the Personality of Godhead Himself, becomes free from all doubts
by the grace of transcendental knowledge. He, as a part and parcel of
the Lord, in full Krsna consciousness, is already established in self-
knowledge. As such, he is undoubtedly above bondage to action.
TEXT 42
tasmad ajnana-sambhutam
hrt-stham jnanasinatmanah
chittvainam samsayam yogam
atisthottistha bharata
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; ajnana-sambhutam--outcome of ignorance; hrt-stham--
situated in the heart; jnana--knowledge; asina--by the weapon of;
atmanah--of the self; chittva--cutting off; enam--this; samsayam--
doubt; yogam--in yoga; atistha--be situated; uttistha--stand up to
fight; bharata--O descendant of Bharata.
TRANSLATION
Therefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance
should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, O
Bharata, stand and fight.
PURPORT
The yoga system instructed in this chapter is called sanatana-yoga, or
eternal activities performed by the living entity. This yoga has two
divisions of sacrificial actions: one is called sacrifice of one's
material possessions, and the other is called knowledge of self, which
is pure spiritual activity. If sacrifice of one's material possessions
is not dovetailed for spiritual realization, then such sacrifice
becomes material. But one who performs such sacrifices with a spiritual
objective, or in devotional service, makes a perfect sacrifice. When we
come to spiritual activities, we find that these are also divided into
two: namely, understanding of one's own self (or one's constitutional
position), and the truth regarding the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One who follows the path of the Gita as it is can very easily
understand these two important divisions of spiritual knowledge. For
him there is no difficulty in obtaining perfect knowledge of the self
as part and parcel of the Lord. And such understanding is beneficial
for such a person who easily understands the transcendental activities
of the Lord. In the beginning of this chapter, the transcendental
activities of the Lord were discussed by the Supreme Lord Himself. One
who does not understand the instructions of the Gita is faithless, and
is to be considered to be misusing the fragmental independence awarded
to him by the Lord. In spite of such instructions, one who does not
understand the real nature of the Lord as the eternal, blissful, all-
knowing Personality of Godhead, is certainly fool number one. Ignorance
can be removed by gradual acceptance of the principles of Krsna
consciousness. Krsna consciousness is awakened by different types of
sacrifices to the demigods, sacrifice to Brahman, sacrifice in
celibacy, in household life, in controlling the senses, in practicing
mystic yoga, in penance, in forgoing material possessions, in studying
the Vedas, and in partaking of the social institution called
varnasrama-dharma. All of these are known as sacrifice, and all of them
are based on regulated action. But within all these activities, the
important factor is self-realization. One who seeks that objective is
the real student of Bhagavad-gita, but one who doubts the authority of
Krsna falls back. One is therefore advised to study Bhagavad-gita, or
any other scripture, under a bona fide spiritual master, with service
and surrender. A bona fide spiritual master is in the disciplic
succession from time eternal, and he does not deviate at all from the
instructions of the Supreme Lord as they were imparted millions of
years ago to the sun-god, from whom the instructions of Bhagavad-gita
have come down to the earthly kingdom. One should, therefore, follow
the path of Bhagavad-gita as it is expressed in the Gita itself and
beware of self-interested people after personal aggrandizement who
deviate others from the actual path. The Lord is definitely the supreme
person, and His activities are transcendental. One who understands this
is a liberated person from the very beginning of his study of the Gita.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Fourth Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of Transcendental Knowledge.