Chapter 3
Karma-yoga
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
jyayasi cet karmanas te
mata buddhir janardana
tat kim karmani ghore mam
niyojayasi kesava
SYNONYMS
arjunah--Arjuna; uvaca--said; jyayasi--speaking very highly; cet--
although; karmanah--than fruitive action; te--Your; mata--opinion;
buddhih--intelligence; janardana--O Krsna; tat--therefore; kim--why;
karmani--in action; ghore--ghastly; mam--me; niyojayasi--engaging me;
kesava--O Krsna.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O Janardana, O Kesava, why do You urge me to engage in
this ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better than
fruitive work?
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead Sri Krsna has very elaborately
described the constitution of the soul in the previous chapter, with a
view to deliver His intimate friend Arjuna from the ocean of material
grief. And the path of realization has been recommended: buddhi-yoga,
or Krsna consciousness. Sometimes Krsna consciousness is misunderstood
to be inertia, and one with such a misunderstanding often withdraws to
a secluded place to become fully Krsna conscious by chanting the holy
name of Lord Krsna. But without being trained in the philosophy of
Krsna consciousness, it is not advisable to chant the holy name of
Krsna in a secluded place, where one may acquire only cheap adoration
from the innocent public. Arjuna also thought of Krsna consciousness or
buddhi-yoga, or intelligence in spiritual advancement of knowledge, as
something like retirement from active life and the practice of penance
and austerity at a secluded place. In other words, he wanted to
skillfully avoid the fighting by using Krsna consciousness as an
excuse. But as a sincere student, he placed the matter before his
master and questioned Krsna as to his best course of action. In answer,
Lord Krsna elaborately explained karma-yoga, or work in Krsna
consciousness, in this Third Chapter.
TEXT 2
vyamisreneva vakyena
buddhim mohayasiva me
tad ekam vada niscitya
yena sreyo 'ham apnuyam
SYNONYMS
vyamisrena--by 
equivocal; 
iva--as; 
vakyena--words; 
buddhim--
intelligence; mohayasi--bewildering; iva--as; me--my; tat--therefore;
ekam--only one; vada--please tell; niscitya--ascertaining; yena--by
which; sreyah--real benefit; aham--I; apnuyam--may have it.
TRANSLATION
My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions.
Therefore, please tell me decisively what is most beneficial for me.
PURPORT
In the previous chapter, as a prelude to the Bhagavad-gita, many
different paths were explained, such as sankhya-yoga, buddhi-yoga,
control of the senses by intelligence, work without fruitive desire,
and the position of the neophyte. This was all presented
unsystematically. A more organized outline of the path would be
necessary for action and understanding. Arjuna, therefore, wanted to
clear up these apparently confusing matters so that any common man
could accept them without misinterpretation. Although Krsna had no
intention of confusing Arjuna by any jugglery of words, Arjuna could
not follow the process of Krsna consciousness--either by inertia or
active service. In other words, by his questions he is clearing the
path of Krsna consciousness for all students who seriously want to
understand the mystery of the Bhagavad-gita.
TEXT 3
sri-bhagavan uvaca
loke 'smin dvi-vidha nistha
pura prokta mayanagha
jnana-yogena sankhyanam
karma-yogena yoginam
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; loke--in
the world; asmin--this; dvi-vidha--two kinds of; nistha--faith; pura--
formerly; prokta--were said; maya--by Me; anagha--O sinless one; jnana-
yogena--by the linking process of knowledge; sankhyanam--of the empiric
philosophers; karma-yogena--by the linking process of devotion;
yoginam--of the devotees.
TRANSLATION
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O sinless Arjuna, I have
already explained that there are two classes of men who try to realize
the self. Some are inclined to understand Him by empirical,
philosophical speculation, and others are inclined to know Him by
devotional work.
PURPORT
In the Second Chapter, verse 39, the Lord explained two kinds of
procedures--namely sankhya-yoga and karma-yoga, or buddhi-yoga. In this
verse, the Lord explains the same more clearly. Sankhya-yoga, or the
analytical study of the nature of spirit and matter, is the subject
matter for persons who are inclined to speculate and understand things
by experimental knowledge and philosophy. The other class of men work
in Krsna consciousness, as it is explained in the 61st verse of the
Second Chapter. The Lord has explained, also in the 39th verse, that by
working by the principles of buddhi-yoga, or Krsna consciousness, one
can be relieved from the bonds of action; and, furthermore, there is no
flaw in the process. The same principle is more clearly explained in
the 61st verse--that this buddhi-yoga is to depend entirely on the
Supreme (or more specifically, on Krsna), and in this way all the
senses can be brought under control very easily. Therefore, both the
yogas are interdependent, as religion and philosophy. Religion without
philosophy is sentiment, or sometimes fanaticism, while philosophy
without religion is mental speculation. The ultimate goal is Krsna,
because the philosophers who are also sincerely searching after the
Absolute Truth come in the end to Krsna consciousness. This is also
stated in the Bhagavad-gita. The whole process is to understand the
real position of the self in relation to the Superself. The indirect
process is philosophical speculation, by which, gradually, one may come
to the point of Krsna consciousness; and the other process is directly
connecting with everything in Krsna consciousness. Of these two, the
path of Krsna consciousness is better because it does not depend on
purifying the senses by a philosophical process. Krsna consciousness is
itself the purifying process, and by the direct method of devotional
service it is simultaneously easy and sublime.
TEXT 4
na karmanam anarambhan
naiskarmyam puruso 'snute
na ca sannyasanad eva
siddhim samadhigacchati
SYNONYMS
na--without; karmanam--of the prescribed duties; anarambhat--
nonperformance; naiskarmyam--freedom from reaction; purusah--man;
asnute--achieve; na--nor; ca--also; sannyasanat--by renunciation; eva--
simply; siddhim--success; samadhigacchati--attain.
TRANSLATION
Not by merely abstaining from work can one achieve freedom from
reaction, nor by renunciation alone can one attain perfection.
PURPORT
The renounced order of life can be accepted upon being purified by the
discharge of the prescribed form of duties which are laid down just to
purify the hearts of materialistic men. Without purification, one
cannot attain success by abruptly adopting the fourth order of life
(sannyasa). According to the empirical philosophers, simply by adopting
sannyasa, or retiring from fruitive activities, one at once becomes as
good as Narayana. But Lord Krsna does not approve this principle.
Without purification of heart, sannyasa is simply a disturbance to the
social order. On the other hand, if someone takes to the transcendental
service of the Lord, even without discharging his prescribed duties,
whatever he may be able to advance in the cause is accepted by the Lord
(buddhi-yoga). Sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat. Even
a slight performance of such a principle enables one to overcome great
difficulties.
TEXT 5
na hi kascit ksanam api
jatu tisthaty akarma-krt
karyate hy avasah karma
sarvah prakrti-jair gunaih
SYNONYMS
na--nor; hi--certainly; kascit--anyone; ksanam--even a moment; api--
also; 
jatu--even; 
tisthati--stands; 
akarma-krt--without 
doing
something; karyate--forced to work; hi--certainly; avasah--helplessly;
karma--work; sarvah--everything; prakrti-jaih--out of the modes of
material nature; gunaih--by the qualities.
TRANSLATION
All men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of
the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing
something, not even for a moment.
PURPORT
It is not a question of embodied life, but it is the nature of the soul
to be always active. Without the presence of the spirit soul, the
material body cannot move. The body is only a dead vehicle to be worked
by the spirit soul, which is always active and cannot stop even for a
moment. As such, the spirit soul has to be engaged in the good work of
Krsna consciousness, otherwise it will be engaged in occupations
dictated by illusory energy. In contact with material energy, the
spirit soul acquires material modes, and to purify the soul from such
affinities it is necessary to engage in the prescribed duties enjoined
in the sastras. But if the soul is engaged in his natural function of
Krsna consciousness, whatever he is able to do is good for him. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.5.17) affirms this:
tyaktva sva-dharmam caranambujam harer
bhajann apakvo 'tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vabhadram abhud amusya kim
ko vartha apto 'bhajatam sva-dharmatah
"If someone takes to Krsna consciousness, even though he may not follow
the prescribed duties in the sastras nor execute the devotional service
properly, and even though he may fall down from the standard, there is
no loss or evil for him. But if he carries out all the injunctions for
purification in the sastras, what does it avail him if he is not Krsna
conscious?" So the purificatory process is necessary for reaching this
point of Krsna consciousness. Therefore, sannyasa, or any purificatory
process, is to help reach the ultimate goal of becoming Krsna
conscious, without which everything is considered a failure.
TEXT 6
karmendriyani samyamya
ya aste manasa smaran
indriyarthan vimudhatma
mithyacarah sa ucyate
SYNONYMS
karma-indriyani--the five working sense organs; samyamya--controlling;
yah--anyone who; aste--remains; manasa--by mind; smaran--thinking;
indriya-arthan--sense objects; vimudha--foolish; atma--soul; mithya-
acarah--pretender; sah--he; ucyate--is called.
TRANSLATION
One who restrains the senses and organs of action, but whose mind
dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a
pretender.
PURPORT
There are many pretenders who refuse to work in Krsna consciousness but
make a show of meditation, while actually dwelling within the mind upon
sense enjoyment. Such pretenders may also speak on dry philosophy in
order to bluff sophisticated followers, but according to this verse
these are the greatest cheaters. For sense enjoyment one can act in any
capacity of the social order, but if one follows the rules and
regulations of his particular status, he can make gradual progress in
purifying his existence. But he who makes a show of being a yogi, while
actually searching for the objects of sense gratification, must be
called the greatest cheater, even though he sometimes speaks of
philosophy. His knowledge has no value because the effects of such a
sinful man's knowledge are taken away by the illusory energy of the
Lord. Such a pretender's mind is always impure, and therefore his show
of yogic meditation has no value whatsoever.
TEXT 7
yas tv indriyani manasa
niyamyarabhate 'rjuna
karmendriyaih karma-yogam
asaktah sa visisyate
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; tu--but; indriyani--senses; manasa--by the mind; niyamya-
-regulating; arabhate--begins; arjuna--O Arjuna; karma-indriyaih--by
the active sense organs; karma-yogam--devotion; asaktah--without
attachment; sah--he; visisyate--by far the better.
TRANSLATION
On the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and engages
his active organs in works of devotion, without attachment, is by far
superior.
PURPORT
Instead of becoming a pseudo-transcendentalist for the sake of wanton
living and sense enjoyment, it is far better to remain in one's own
business and execute the purpose of life, which is to get free from
material bondage and enter into the kingdom of God. The prime svartha-
gati, or goal of self-interest, is to reach Visnu. The whole
institution of varna and asrama is designed to help us reach this goal
of life. A householder can also reach this destination by regulated
service in Krsna consciousness. For self-realization, one can live a
controlled life, as prescribed in the sastras, and continue carrying
out his business without attachment, and in that way make progress.
Such a sincere person who follows this method is far better situated
than the false pretender who adopts show-bottle spiritualism to cheat
the innocent public. A sincere sweeper in the street is far better than
the charlatan meditator who meditates only for the sake of making a
living.
TEXT 8
niyatam kuru karma tvam
karma jyayo hy akarmanah
sarira-yatrapi ca te
na prasiddhyed akarmanah
SYNONYMS
niyatam--prescribed; kuru--do; karma--duties; tvam--you; karma--work;
jyayah--better; hi--than; akarmanah--without work; sarira--bodily;
yatra--maintenance; 
api--even; 
ca--also; 
te--your; 
na--never;
prasiddhyet--effected; akarmanah--without work.
TRANSLATION
Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man
cannot even maintain his physical body without work.
PURPORT
There are many pseudo-meditators who misrepresent themselves as
belonging to high parentage, and great professional men who falsely
pose that they have sacrificed everything for the sake of advancement
in spiritual life. Lord Krsna did not want Arjuna to become a
pretender, but that he perform his prescribed duties as set forth for
ksatriyas. Arjuna was a householder and a military general, and
therefore it was better for him to remain as such and perform his
religious duties as prescribed for the householder ksatriya. Such
activities gradually cleanse the heart of a mundane man and free him
from material contamination. So-called renunciation for the purpose of
maintenance is never approved by the Lord, nor by any religious
scripture. After all, one has to maintain one's body and soul together
by some work. Work should not be given up capriciously, without
purification of materialistic propensities. Anyone who is in the
material world is certainly possessed of the impure propensity for
lording it over material nature, or, in other words, for sense
gratification. Such polluted propensities have to be cleared. Without
doing so, through prescribed duties, one should never attempt to become
a so-called transcendentalist, renouncing work and living at the cost
of others.
TEXT 9
yajnarthat karmano 'nyatra
loko 'yam karma-bandhanah
tad-artham karma kaunteya
mukta-sangah samacara
SYNONYMS
yajna-arthat--only for the sake of Yajna, or Visnu; karmanah--work
done; anyatra--otherwise; lokah--this world; ayam--this; karma-
bandhanah--bondage by work; tat--Him; artham--for the sake; karma--
work; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; mukta-sangah--liberated from
association; samacara--do perfectly.
TRANSLATION
Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work
binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti, perform
your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will
always remain unattached and free from bondage.
PURPORT
Since one has to work even for the simple maintenance of the body, the
prescribed duties for a particular social position and quality are so
made that that purpose can be fulfilled. Yajna means Lord Visnu, or
sacrificial performances. All sacrificial performances also are meant
for the satisfaction of Lord Visnu. The Vedas enjoin: yajno vai visnuh.
In other words, the same purpose is served whether one performs
prescribed yajnas or directly serves Lord Visnu. Krsna consciousness is
therefore performance of yajna as it is prescribed in this verse. The
varnasrama institution also aims at this for satisfying Lord Visnu.
Varnasramacaravata purusena parah puman. visnur aradhyate (Visnu Purana
3.8.8). Therefore one has to work for the satisfaction of Visnu. Any
other work done in this material world will be a cause of bondage, for
both good and evil work have their reactions, and any reaction binds
the performer. Therefore, one has to work in Krsna consciousness to
satisfy Krsna (or Visnu); and while performing such activities one is
in a liberated stage. This is the great art of doing work, and in the
beginning this process requires very expert guidance. One should
therefore act very diligently, under the expert guidance of a devotee
of Lord Krsna, or under the direct instruction of Lord Krsna Himself
(under whom Arjuna had the opportunity to work). Nothing should be
performed for sense gratification, but everything should be done for
the satisfaction of Krsna. This practice will not only save one from
the reaction of work, but will also gradually elevate one to
transcendental loving service of the Lord, which alone can raise one to
the kingdom of God.
TEXT 10
saha-yajnah prajah srstva
purovaca prajapatih
anena prasavisyadhvam
esa vo 'stv ista-kama-dhuk
SYNONYMS
saha--along with; yajnah--sacrifices; prajah--generations; srstva--
creating; pura--anciently; uvaca--said; praja-patih--the Lord of
creatures; anena--by this; prasavisyadhvam--be more and more
prosperous; esah--certainly; vah--your; astu--let it be; ista--all
desirable; kama-dhuk--bestower.
TRANSLATION
In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth
generations of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Visnu, and
blessed them by saying, "Be thou happy by this yajna [sacrifice]
because its performance will bestow upon you all desirable things."
PURPORT
The material creation by the Lord of creatures (Visnu) is a chance
offered to the conditioned souls to come back home--back to Godhead.
All living entities within the material creation are conditioned by
material nature because of their forgetfulness of their relationship to
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedic principles are to
help us understand this eternal relation, as it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gita: vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah. The Lord says that
the purpose of the Vedas is to understand Him. In the Vedic hymns it is
said: patim visvasyatmesvaram. Therefore, the Lord of the living
entities is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu. In the Srimad-
Bhagavatam also (2.4.20) Srila Sukadeva Gosvami describes the Lord as
pati in so many ways:
sriyah patir yajna-patih praja-patir
dhiyam patir loka-patir dhara-patih
patir gatis candhaka-vrsni-satvatam
prasidatam me bhagavan satam patih
The praja-pati is Lord Visnu, and He is the Lord of all living
creatures, all worlds, and all beauties, and the protector of everyone.
The Lord created this material world for the conditioned souls to learn
how to perform yajnas (sacrifices) for the satisfaction of Visnu, so
that while in the material world they can live very comfortably without
anxiety and after finishing the present material body, they can enter
into the kingdom of God. That is the whole program for the conditioned
soul. By performance of yajna, the conditioned souls gradually become
Krsna conscious and become godly in all respects. In the Age of Kali,
the sankirtana-yajna (the chanting of the names of God) is recommended
by the Vedic scriptures, and this transcendental system was introduced
by Lord Caitanya for the deliverance of all men in this age.
Sankirtana-yajna and Krsna consciousness go well together. Lord Krsna
in His devotional form (as Lord Caitanya) is mentioned in the Srimad-
Bhagavatam (11.5.32) as follows, with special reference to the
sankirtana-yajna:
krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
sangopangastra-parsadam
yajnaih sankirtana-prayair
yajanti hi su-medhasah
"In this Age of Kali, people who are endowed with sufficient
intelligence will worship the Lord, who is accompanied by His
associates, by performance of sankirtana-yajna." Other yajnas
prescribed in the Vedic literatures are not easy to perform in this Age
of Kali, but the sankirtana-yajna is easy and sublime for all purposes.
TEXT 11
devan bhavayatanena
te deva bhavayantu vah
parasparam bhavayantah
sreyah param avapsyatha
SYNONYMS
devan--demigods; bhavayata--having pleased; anena--by this sacrifice;
te--those; devah--the demigods; bhavayantu--will please; vah--you;
parasparam--mutual; bhavayantah--pleasing one another; sreyah--
benediction; param--the supreme; avapsyatha--do you achieve.
TRANSLATION
The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you; thus
nourishing one another, there will reign general prosperity for all.
PURPORT
The demigods are empowered administrators of material affairs. The
supply of air, light, water and all other benedictions for maintaining
the body and soul of every living entity are entrusted to the demigods,
who are innumerable assistants in different parts of the body of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Their pleasures and displeasures are
dependent on the performance of yajnas by the human being. Some of the
yajnas are meant to satisfy particular demigods; but even in so doing,
Lord Visnu is worshiped in all yajnas as the chief beneficiary. It is
stated also in the Bhagavad-gita that Krsna Himself is the beneficiary
of all kinds of yajnas: bhoktaram yajna-tapasam. Therefore, ultimate
satisfaction of the yajna-pati is the chief purpose of all yajnas. When
these yajnas are perfectly performed, naturally the demigods in charge
of the different departments of supply are pleased, and there is no
scarcity in the supply of natural products.
Performance of yajnas has many side benefits, ultimately leading to
liberation from the material bondage. By performance of yajnas, all
activities become purified, as it is stated in the Vedas:
ahara-suddhau sattva-suddhih sattva-suddhau
dhruva smrtih smrti-lambhe sarvagranthinam vipramoksah
As it will be explained in the following verses, by performance of
yajna one's eatables become sanctified, and by eating sanctified
foodstuffs one's very existence becomes purified; by the purification
of existence, finer tissues in memory become sanctified, and when
memory is sanctified, one can think of the path of liberation, and all
these combined together lead to Krsna consciousness, the great
necessity of present-day society.
TEXT 12
istan bhogan hi vo deva
dasyante yajna-bhavitah
tair dattan apradayaibhyo
yo bhunkte stena eva sah
SYNONYMS
istan--desired; bhogan--necessities of life; hi--certainly; vah--unto
you; devah--the demigods; dasyante--award; yajna-bhavitah--being
satisfied by the performance of sacrifices; taih--by them; dattan--
things given; apradaya--without offering; ebhyah--to the demigods; yah-
-he who; bhunkte--enjoys; stenah--thief; eva--certainly; sah--is he.
TRANSLATION
In charge of the various necessities of life, the demigods, being
satisfied by the performance of yajna [sacrifice], supply all
necessities to man. But he who enjoys these gifts without offering them
to the demigods in return is certainly a thief.
PURPORT
The demigods are authorized supplying agents on behalf of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Visnu. Therefore, they must be satisfied by the
performance of prescribed yajnas. In the Vedas, there are different
kinds of yajnas prescribed for different kinds of demigods, but all are
ultimately offered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For one who
cannot understand what the Personality of Godhead is, sacrifice to the
demigods is recommended. According to the different material qualities
of the persons concerned, different types of yajnas are recommended in
the Vedas. Worship of different demigods is also on the same basis--
namely, according to different qualities. For example, the meat-eaters
are recommended to worship the goddess Kali, the ghastly form of
material nature, and before the goddess the sacrifice of animals is
recommended. But for those who are in the mode of goodness, the
transcendental worship of Visnu is recommended. But ultimately, all
yajnas are meant for gradual promotion to the transcendental position.
For ordinary men, at least five yajnas, known as panca-maha-yajna, are
necessary.
One should know, however, that all the necessities of life that the
human society requires are supplied by the demigod agents of the Lord.
No one can manufacture anything. Take, for example, all the eatables of
human society. These eatables include grains, fruits, vegetables, milk,
sugar, etc., for persons in the mode of goodness, and also eatables for
the non-vegetarians, like meats, etc., none of which can be
manufactured by men. Then again, take for example heat, light, water,
air, etc., which are also necessities of life--none of them can be
manufactured by the human society. Without the Supreme Lord, there can
be no profuse sunlight, moonlight, rainfall, breeze, etc., without
which no one can live. Obviously, our life is dependent on supplies
from the Lord. Even for our manufacturing enterprises, we require so
many raw materials like metal, sulphur, mercury, manganese, and so many
essentials--all of which are supplied by the agents of the Lord, with
the purpose that we should make proper use of them to keep ourselves
fit and healthy for the purpose of self-realization, leading to the
ultimate goal of life, namely, liberation from the material struggle
for existence. This aim of life is attained by performance of yajnas.
If we forget the purpose of human life and simply take supplies from
the agents of the Lord for sense gratification and become more and more
entangled in material existence, which is not the purpose of creation,
certainly we become thieves, and therefore we are punished by the laws
of material nature. A society of thieves can never be happy because
they have no aim in life. The gross materialist thieves have no
ultimate goal of life. They are simply directed to sense gratification;
nor do they have knowledge of how to perform yajnas. Lord Caitanya,
however, inaugurated the easiest performance of yajna, namely the
sankirtana-yajna, which can be performed by anyone in the world who
accepts the principles of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 13
yajna-sistasinah santo
mucyante sarva-kilbisaih
bhunjate te tv agham papa
ye pacanty atma-karanat
SYNONYMS
yajna-sista--food taken after performance of yajna; asinah--eaters;
santah--the devotees; mucyante--get relief from; sarva--all kinds of;
kilbisaih--from sins; bhunjate--enjoy; te--they; tu--but; agham--
grievous sins; papah--sinners; ye--those; pacanti--prepare food; atma-
karanat--for sense enjoyment.
TRANSLATION
The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins because
they eat food which is offered first for sacrifice. Others, who prepare
food for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin.
PURPORT
The devotees of the Supreme Lord, or the persons who are in Krsna
consciousness, are called santas, and they are always in love with the
Lord as it is described in the Brahma-samhita (5.38): premanjana-
cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti. The
santas, being always in a compact of love with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Govinda (the giver of all pleasures), or Mukunda (the giver
of liberation), or Krsna (the all-attractive person), cannot accept
anything without first offering it to the Supreme Person. Therefore,
such devotees always perform yajnas in different modes of devotional
service, such as sravanam, kirtanam, smaranam, arcanam, etc., and these
performances of yajnas keep them always aloof from all kinds of
contamination of sinful association in the material world. Others, who
prepare food for self or sense gratification, are not only thieves, but
are also the eaters of all kinds of sins. How can a person be happy if
he is both a thief and sinful? It is not possible. Therefore, in order
for people to become happy in all respects, they must be taught to
perform the easy process of sankirtana-yajna, in full Krsna
consciousness. Otherwise, there can be no peace or happiness in the
world.
TEXT 14
annad bhavanti bhutani
parjanyad anna-sambhavah
yajnad bhavati parjanyo
yajnah karma-samudbhavah
SYNONYMS
annat--from grains; bhavanti--grow; bhutani--the material bodies;
parjanyat--from rains; anna--of food grains; sambhavah--are made
possible; yajnat--from the performance of sacrifice; bhavati--becomes
possible; parjanyah--rains; yajnah--performance of yajna; karma--
prescribed duties; samudbhavah--born of.
TRANSLATION
All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from
rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajna [sacrifice], and
yajna is born of prescribed duties.
PURPORT
Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana, a great commentator on the Bhagavad-gita,
writes as follows: ye indrady-angatayavasthitam yajnam sarvesvaram
visnum abhyarcya tac-chesam asnanti tena tad deha-yatram sampadayanti,
te santah sarvesvarasya yajna-purusasya bhaktah sarva-kilbisair anadi-
kala-vivrddhair 
atmanubhava-prati 
bandhakair 
nikhilaih 
papair
vimucyante. The Supreme Lord, who is known as the yajna-purusa, or the
personal beneficiary of all sacrifices, is the master of all demigods,
who serve Him as the different limbs of the body serve the whole.
Demigods like Indra, Candra, Varuna, etc., are appointed officers who
manage material affairs, and the Vedas direct sacrifices to satisfy
these demigods so that they may be pleased to supply air, light and
water sufficiently to produce food grains. When Lord Krsna is
worshiped, the demigods, who are different limbs of the Lord, are also
automatically worshiped; therefore there is no separate need to worship
the demigods. For this reason, the devotees of the Lord, who are in
Krsna consciousness, offer food to Krsna and then eat--a process which
nourishes the body spiritually. By such action not only are past sinful
reactions in the body vanquished, but the body becomes immunized to all
contamination of material nature. When there is an epidemic disease, an
antiseptic vaccine protects a person from the attack of such an
epidemic. Similarly, food offered to Lord Visnu and then taken by us
makes us sufficiently resistant to material affection, and one who is
accustomed to this practice is called a devotee of the Lord. Therefore,
a person in Krsna consciousness, who eats only food offered to Krsna,
can counteract all reactions of past material infections, which are
impediments to the progress of self-realization. On the other hand, one
who does not do so continues to increase the volume of sinful action,
and this prepares the next body to resemble hogs and dogs, to suffer
the resultant reactions of all sins. The material world is full of
contaminations, and one who is immunized by accepting prasadam of the
Lord (food offered to Visnu) is saved from the attack, whereas one who
does not do so becomes subjected to contamination.
Food grains or vegetables are factually eatables. The human being eats
different kinds of food grains, vegetables, fruits, etc., and the
animals eat the refuse of the food grains and vegetables, grass,
plants, etc. Human beings who are accustomed to eating meat and flesh
must also depend on the production of vegetation in order to eat the
animals. Therefore, ultimately, we have to depend on the production of
the field and not on the production of big factories. The field
production is due to sufficient rain from the sky, and such rains are
controlled by demigods like Indra, sun, moon, etc., and they are all
servants of the Lord. The Lord can be satisfied by sacrifices;
therefore, one who cannot perform them will find himself in scarcity--
that is the law of nature. Yajna, specifically the sankirtana-yajna
prescribed for this age, must therefore be performed to save us at
least from scarcity of food supply.
TEXT 15
karma brahmodbhavam viddhi
brahmaksara-samudbhavam
tasmat sarva-gatam brahma
nityam yajne pratisthitam
SYNONYMS
karma--work; brahma--Vedas; udbhavam--produced from; viddhi--one should
know; brahma--the Vedas; aksara--the Supreme Brahman (Personality of
Godhead); samudbhavam--directly manifested; tasmat--therefore; sarva-
gatam--all-pervading; brahma--transcendence; nityam--eternally; yajne--
in sacrifice; pratisthitam--situated.
TRANSLATION
Regulated activities are prescribed in the Vedas, and the Vedas are
directly manifested from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Consequently the all-pervading Transcendence is eternally situated in
acts of sacrifice.
PURPORT
Yajnartha-karma, or the necessity of work for the satisfaction of Krsna
only, is more expressly stated in this verse. If we have to work for
the satisfaction of the yajna-purusa, Visnu, then we must find out the
direction of work in Brahman, or the transcendental Vedas. The Vedas
are therefore codes of working directions. Anything performed without
the direction of the Vedas is called vikarma, or unauthorized or sinful
work. Therefore, one should always take direction from the Vedas to be
saved from the reaction of work. As one has to work in ordinary life by
the direction of the state, similarly, one has to work under the
direction of the supreme state of the Lord. Such directions in the
Vedas are directly manifested from the breathing of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is said: asya mahato bhutasya nisvasitam
etad yad rg-vedo yajur-vedah samavedo 'tharvangirasah. "The four Vedas-
-namely the Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, Sama Veda and Atharva Veda--are all
emanations from the breathing of the great Personality of Godhead."
(Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 4.5.11) The Lord, being omnipotent, can speak
by breathing air, as it is confirmed in the Brahma-samhita, for the
Lord has the omnipotence to perform through each of His senses the
actions of all other senses. In other words, the Lord can speak through
His breathing, and He can impregnate by His eyes. In fact, it is said
that He glanced over material nature and thus fathered all living
entities. After creating or impregnating the conditioned souls in the
womb of material nature, He gave His directions in the Vedic wisdom as
to how such conditioned souls can return home, back to Godhead. We
should always remember that the conditioned souls in material nature
are all eager for material enjoyment. But the Vedic directions are so
made that one can satisfy one's perverted desires, then return to
Godhead, having finished his so-called enjoyment. It is a chance for
the conditioned souls to attain liberation; therefore the conditioned
souls must try to follow the process of yajna by becoming Krsna
conscious. Even those who cannot follow the Vedic injunctions may adopt
the principles of Krsna consciousness, and that will take the place of
performance of Vedic yajnas, or karmas.
TEXT 16
evam pravartitam cakram
nanuvartayatiha yah
aghayur indriyaramo
mogham partha sa jivati
SYNONYMS
evam--thus prescribed; pravartitam--established by the Vedas; cakram--
cycle; na--does not; anuvartayati--adopt; iha--in this life; yah--one
who; agha-ayuh--life full of sins; indriya-aramah--satisfied in sense
gratification; mogham--useless; partha--O son of Prtha (Arjuna); sah--
one who does so; jivati--lives.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, a man who does not follow this prescribed Vedic system
of sacrifice certainly leads a life full of sin, for a person
delighting only in the senses lives in vain.
PURPORT
The mammonist philosophy of work very hard and enjoy sense
gratification is condemned herein by the Lord. Therefore, for those who
want to enjoy this material world, the above-mentioned cycle of
performing yajnas is absolutely necessary. One who does not follow such
regulations is living a very risky life, being condemned more and more.
By nature's law, this human form of life is specifically meant for
self-realization, in either of the three ways--namely karma-yoga,
jnana-yoga or bhakti-yoga. There is no necessity of rigidly following
the performances of the prescribed yajnas for the transcendentalists
who are above vice and virtue; but those who are engaged in sense
gratification require purification by the above-mentioned cycle of
yajna performances. There are different kinds of activities. Those who
are not Krsna conscious are certainly engaged in sensory consciousness;
therefore they need to execute pious work. The yajna system is planned
in such a way that sensory conscious persons may satisfy their desires
without becoming entangled in the reactions of sense-gratificatory
work. The prosperity of the world depends not on our own efforts but on
the background arrangement of the Supreme Lord, directly carried out by
the demigods. Therefore, the yajnas are directly aimed at the
particular demigod mentioned in the Vedas. Indirectly, it is the
practice of Krsna consciousness, because when one masters the
performance of yajnas, one is sure to become Krsna conscious. But if by
performing yajnas one does not become Krsna conscious, such principles
are counted as only moral codes. One should not, therefore, limit his
progress only to the point of moral codes, but should transcend them,
to attain Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 17
yas tv atma-ratir eva syad
atma-trptas ca manavah
atmany eva ca santustas
tasya karyam na vidyate
SYNONYMS
yah--one who; tu--but; atma-ratih--takes pleasure; eva--certainly;
syat--remains; atma-trptah--self-illuminated; ca--and; manavah--a man;
atmani--in himself; eva--only; ca--and; santustah--perfectly satiated;
tasya--his; karyam--duty; na--does not; vidyate--exist.
TRANSLATION
One who is, however, taking pleasure in the self, who is illuminated in
the self, who rejoices in and is satisfied with the self only, fully
satiated--for him there is no duty.
PURPORT
A person who is fully Krsna conscious, and is fully satisfied by his
acts in Krsna consciousness, no longer has any duty to perform. Due to
his being Krsna conscious, all impiety within is instantly cleansed, an
effect of many, many thousands of yajna performances. By such clearing
of consciousness, one becomes fully confident of his eternal position
in relationship with the Supreme. His duty thus becomes self-
illuminated by the grace of the Lord, and therefore he no longer has
any obligations to the Vedic injunctions. Such a Krsna conscious person
is no longer interested in material activities and no longer takes
pleasure in material arrangements like wine, women and similar
infatuations.
TEXT 18
naiva tasya krtenartho
nakrteneha kascana
na casya sarva-bhutesu
kascid artha-vyapasrayah
SYNONYMS
na--never; eva--certainly; tasya--his; krtena--by discharge of duty;
arthah--purpose; na--nor; akrtena--without discharge of duty; iha--in
this world; kascana--whatever; na--never; ca--and; asya--of him; sarva-
bhutesu--in 
all 
living 
beings; 
kascit--any; 
artha--purpose;
vyapasrayah--taking shelter of.
TRANSLATION
A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his
prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor
has he any need to depend on any other living being.
PURPORT
A self-realized man is no longer obliged to perform any prescribed
duty, save and except activities in Krsna consciousness. Krsna
consciousness is not inactivity either, as will be explained in the
following verses. A Krsna conscious man does not take shelter of any
person--man or demigod. Whatever he does in Krsna consciousness is
sufficient in the discharge of his obligation.
TEXT 19
tasmad asaktah satatam
karyam karma samacara
asakto hy acaran karma
param apnoti purusah
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; asaktah--without attachment; satatam--constantly;
karyam--as duty; karma--work; samacara--perform; asaktah--nonattached;
hi--certainly; acaran--performing; karma--work; param--the Supreme;
apnoti--achieves; purusah--a man.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one
should act as a matter of duty; for by working without attachment one
attains the Supreme.
PURPORT
The Supreme is the Personality of Godhead for the devotees, and
liberation for the impersonalist. A person, therefore, acting for
Krsna, or in Krsna consciousness, under proper guidance and without
attachment to the result of the work, is certainly making progress
toward the supreme goal of life. Arjuna is told that he should fight in
the Battle of Kuruksetra for the interest of Krsna because Krsna wanted
him to fight. To be a good man or a nonviolent man is a personal
attachment, but to act on behalf of the Supreme is to act without
attachment for the result. That is perfect action of the highest
degree, recommended by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna.
Vedic rituals, like prescribed sacrifices, are performed for
purification of impious activities that were performed in the field of
sense 
gratification. 
But 
action 
in 
Krsna 
consciousness 
is
transcendental to the reactions of good or evil work. A Krsna conscious
person has no attachment for the result but acts on behalf of Krsna
alone. He engages in all kinds of activities, but is completely
nonattached.
TEXT 20
karmanaiva hi samsiddhim
asthita janakadayah
loka-sangraham evapi
sampasyan kartum arhasi
SYNONYMS
karmana--by work; eva--even; hi--certainly; samsiddhim--perfection;
asthitah--situated; janaka-adayah--Janaka and other kings; loka-
sangraham--educating the people in general; eva--also; api--for the
sake of; sampasyan--by considering; kartum--to act; arhasi--deserve.
TRANSLATION
Kings such as Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage by
performance of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for the sake of
educating the people in general, you should perform your work.
PURPORT
Kings like Janaka and others were all self-realized souls; consequently
they had no obligation to perform the prescribed duties in the Vedas.
Nonetheless they performed all prescribed activities just to set
examples for the people in general. Janaka was the father of Sita and
father-in-law of Lord Sri Rama. Being a great devotee of the Lord, he
was transcendentally situated, but because he was the king of Mithila
(a subdivision of Bihar province in India), he had to teach his
subjects how to fight righteously in battle. He and his subjects fought
to teach people in general that violence is also necessary in a
situation where good arguments fail. Before the Battle of Kuruksetra,
every effort was made to avoid the war, even by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but the other party was determined to fight. So for such a
right cause, there is a necessity for fighting. Although one who is
situated in Krsna consciousness may not have any interest in the world,
he still works to teach the public how to live and how to act.
Experienced persons in Krsna consciousness can act in such a way that
others will follow, and this is explained in the following verse.
TEXT 21
yad yad acarati sresthas
tat tad evetaro janah
sa yat pramanam kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
SYNONYMS
yat--whatever; yat--and whichever; acarati--does he act; sresthah--a
respectable leader; tat--that; tat--and that alone; eva--certainly;
itarah--common; janah--person; sah--he; yat--whichever; pramanam--
evidence; kurute--does perform; lokah--all the world; tat--that;
anuvartate--follow in the footsteps.
TRANSLATION
Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all the
world pursues.
PURPORT
People in general always require a leader who can teach the public by
practical behavior. A leader cannot teach the public to stop smoking if
he himself smokes. Lord Caitanya said that a teacher should behave
properly even before he begins teaching. One who teaches in that way is
called acarya, or the ideal teacher. Therefore, a teacher must follow
the principles of sastra (scripture) to reach the common man. The
teacher cannot manufacture rules against the principles of revealed
scriptures. The revealed scriptures, like Manu-samhita and similar
others, are considered the standard books to be followed by human
society. Thus the leader's teaching should be based on the principles
of such standard rules as they are practiced by the great teachers. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam also affirms that one should follow in the footsteps
of great devotees, and that is the way of progress on the path of
spiritual realization. The king or the executive head of a state, the
father and the school teacher are all considered to be natural leaders
of the innocent people in general. All such natural leaders have a
great responsibility to their dependents; therefore they must be
conversant with standard books of moral and spiritual codes.
TEXT 22
na me parthasti kartavyam
trisu lokesu kincana
nanavaptam avaptavyam
varta eva ca karmani
SYNONYMS
na--not; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; asti--there is; kartavyam--
any prescribed duty; trisu--in the three; lokesu--planetary systems;
kincana--anything; na--no; anavaptam--in want; avaptavyam--to be
gained; varte--engaged; eva--certainly; ca--also; karmani--in one's
prescribed duty.
TRANSLATION
O son of Prtha, there is no work prescribed for Me within all the three
planetary systems. Nor am I in want of anything, nor have I need to
obtain anything--and yet I am engaged in work.
PURPORT
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the Vedic
literatures as follows:
tam isvaranam paramam mahesvaram
tam devatanam paramam ca daivatam
patim patinam paramam parastad
vidama devam bhuvanesam idyam
na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate
na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate
parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate
svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca
"The Supreme Lord is the controller of all other controllers, and He is
the greatest of all the diverse planetary leaders. Everyone is under
His control. All entities are delegated with particular power only by
the Supreme Lord; they are not supreme themselves. He is also
worshipable by all demigods and is the supreme director of all
directors. Therefore, He is transcendental to all kinds of material
leaders and controllers and is worshipable by all. There is no one
greater than Him, and He is the supreme cause of all causes.
"He does not possess bodily form like that of an ordinary living
entity. There is no difference between His body and His soul. He is
absolute. All His senses are transcendental. Any one of His senses can
perform the action of any other sense. Therefore no one is greater than
Him or equal to Him. His potencies are multifarious, and thus His deeds
are automatically performed as a natural sequence." (Svetasvatara
Upanisad 6.7-8)
Since everything is in full opulence in the Personality of Godhead and
is existing in full truth, there is no duty for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to perform. One who must receive the results of work has
some designated duty, but one who has nothing to achieve within the
three planetary systems certainly has no duty. And yet Lord Krsna is
engaged on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra as the leader of the ksatriyas
because the ksatriyas are duty-bound to give protection to the
distressed. Although He is above all the regulations of the revealed
scriptures, He does not do anything that violates the revealed
scriptures.
TEXT 23
yadi hy aham na varteyam
jatu karmany atandritah
mama vartmanuvartante
manusyah partha sarvasah
SYNONYMS
yadi--if; hi--certainly; aham--I; na--do not; varteyam--thus engage;
jatu--ever; karmani--in the performance of prescribed duties;
atandritah--with great care; mama--My; vartma--path; anuvartante--would
follow; manusyah--all men; partha--O son of Prtha; sarvasah--in all
respects.
TRANSLATION
For if I did not engage in work, O Partha, certainly all men would
follow My path.
PURPORT
In order to keep the balance of social tranquillity for progress in
spiritual life, there are traditional family usages meant for every
civilized man. Although such rules and regulations are for the
conditioned souls and not Lord Krsna, because He descended to establish
the principles of religion, He followed the prescribed rules.
Otherwise, common men would follow in His footsteps, because He is the
greatest authority. From the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is understood that
Lord Krsna was performing all the religious duties at home and out of
home, as required of a householder.
TEXT 24
utsideyur ime loka
na kuryam karma ced aham
sankarasya ca karta syam
upahanyam imah prajah
SYNONYMS
utsideyuh--put into ruin; ime--all these; lokah--worlds; na--do not;
kuryam--perform; 
karma--prescribed 
duties; 
cet--if; 
aham--I;
sankarasya--of unwanted population; ca--and; karta--creator; syam--
shall be; upahanyam--destroy; imah--all these; prajah--living entities.
TRANSLATION
If I should cease to work, then all these worlds would be put to
ruination. I would also be the cause of creating unwanted population,
and I would thereby destroy the peace of all sentient beings.
PURPORT
Varna-sankara is unwanted population which disturbs the peace of the
general society. In order to check this social disturbance, there are
prescribed rules and regulations by which the population can
automatically become peaceful and organized for spiritual progress in
life. When Lord Krsna descends, naturally He deals with such rules and
regulations in order to maintain the prestige and necessity of such
important performances. The Lord is the father of all living entities,
and if the living entities are misguided, indirectly the responsibility
goes to the Lord. Therefore, whenever there is general disregard of
regulative principles, the Lord Himself descends and corrects the
society. We should, however, note carefully that although we have to
follow in the footsteps of the Lord, we still have to remember that we
cannot imitate Him. Following and imitating are not on the same level.
We cannot imitate the Lord by lifting Govardhana Hill, as the Lord did
in His childhood. It is impossible for any human being. We have to
follow His instructions, but we may not imitate Him at any time. The
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.33.30-31) affirms:
naitat samacarej jatu
manasapi hy anisvarah
vinasyaty acaran maudhyad
yatha 'rudro 'bdhi-jam visam
isvaranam vacah satyam
tathaivacaritam kvacit
tesam yat sva-vaco-yuktam
buddhimams tat samacaret
"One should simply follow the instructions of the Lord and His
empowered servants. Their instructions are all good for us, and any
intelligent person will perform them as instructed. However, one should
guard against trying to imitate their actions. One should not try to
drink the ocean of poison in imitation of Lord Siva."
We should always consider the position of the isvaras, or those who can
actually control the movements of the sun and moon, as superior.
Without such power, one cannot imitate the isvaras, who are
superpowerful. Lord Siva drank poison to the extent of swallowing an
ocean, but if any common man tries to drink even a fragment of such
poison, he will be killed. There are many pseudo-devotees of Lord Siva
who want to indulge in smoking ganja (marijuana) and similar
intoxicating drugs, forgetting that by so imitating the acts of Lord
Siva they are calling death very near. Similarly, there are some
pseudo-devotees of Lord Krsna who prefer to imitate the Lord in His
rasa-lila, or dance of love, forgetting their inability to lift
Govardhana Hill. It is best, therefore, that one not try to imitate the
powerful, but simply follow their instructions; nor should one try to
occupy their posts without qualification. There are so many
"incarnations" of God without the power of the Supreme Godhead.
TEXT 25
saktah karmany avidvamso
yatha kurvanti bharata
kuryad vidvams tathasaktas
cikirsur loka-sangraham
SYNONYMS
saktah--being attached; karmani--prescribed duties; avidvamsah--the
ignorant; yatha--as much as; kurvanti--do it; bharata--O descendant of
Bharata; kuryat--must do; vidvan--the learned; tatha--thus; asaktah--
without attachment; cikirsuh--desiring to; loka-sangraham--leading the
people in general.
TRANSLATION
As the ignorant perform their duties with attachment to results,
similarly the learned may also act, but without attachment, for the
sake of leading the people on the right path.
PURPORT
A person in Krsna consciousness and a person not in Krsna consciousness
are differentiated by different desires. A Krsna conscious person does
not do anything which is not conducive to development of Krsna
consciousness. He may even act exactly like the ignorant person, who is
too much attached to material activities, but one is engaged in such
activities for the satisfaction of his sense gratification, whereas the
other is engaged for the satisfaction of Krsna. Therefore, the Krsna
conscious person is required to show the people how to act and how to
engage the results of action for the purpose of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 26
na buddhi-bhedam janayed
ajnanam karma-sanginam
josayet sarva-karmani
vidvan yuktah samacaran
SYNONYMS
na--do not; buddhi-bhedam--disrupt the intelligence; janayet--do;
ajnanam--of the foolish; karma-sanginam--attached to fruitive work;
josayet--dovetailed; sarva--all; karmani--work; vidvan--learned;
yuktah--all engaged; samacaran--practicing.
TRANSLATION
Let not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached to
fruitive action, they should not be encouraged to refrain from work,
but to engage in work in the spirit of devotion.
PURPORT
Vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah: That is the end of all Vedic
rituals. All rituals, all performances of sacrifices, and everything
that is put into the Vedas, including all direction for material
activities, are meant for understanding Krsna, who is the ultimate goal
of life. But because the conditioned souls do not know anything beyond
sense gratification, they study the Vedas to that end. Through sense
regulations, however, one is gradually elevated to Krsna consciousness.
Therefore a realized soul in Krsna consciousness should not disturb
others in their activities or understanding, but he should act by
showing how the results of all work can be dedicated to the service of
Krsna. The learned Krsna conscious person may act in such a way that
the ignorant person working for sense gratification may learn how to
act and how to behave. Although the ignorant man is not to be disturbed
in his activities, still, a slightly developed Krsna conscious person
may directly be engaged in the service of the Lord without waiting for
other Vedic formulas. For this fortunate man there is no need to follow
the Vedic rituals, because in direct Krsna consciousness one can have
all the results simply by following the prescribed duties of a
particular person.
TEXT 27
prakrteh kriyamanani
gunaih karmani sarvasah
ahankara-vimudhatma
kartaham iti manyate
SYNONYMS
prakrteh--of material nature; kriyamanani--all being done; gunaih--by
the modes; karmani--activities; sarvasah--all kinds of; ahankara-
vimudha--bewildered by false ego; atma--the spirit soul; karta--doer;
aham--I; iti--thus; manyate--thinks.
TRANSLATION
The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes of
material nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities, which are
in actuality carried out by nature.
PURPORT
Two persons, one in Krsna consciousness and the other in material
consciousness, working on the same level, may appear to be working on
the same platform, but there is a wide gulf of difference in their
respective positions. The person in material consciousness is convinced
by false ego that he is the doer of everything. He does not know that
the mechanism of the body is produced by material nature, which works
under the supervision of the Supreme Lord. The materialistic person has
no knowledge that ultimately he is under the control of Krsna. The
person in false ego takes all credit for doing everything
independently, and that is the symptom of his nescience. He does not
know that this gross and subtle body is the creation of material
nature, under the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and as
such his bodily and mental activities should be engaged in the service
of Krsna, in Krsna consciousness. The ignorant man forgets that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is known as Hrsikesa, or the master of
the senses of the material body, for due to his long misuse of the
senses in sense gratification, he is factually bewildered by the false
ego, which makes him forget his eternal relationship with Krsna.
TEXT 28
tattva-vit tu maha-baho
guna-karma-vibhagayoh
guna gunesu vartanta
iti matva na sajjate
SYNONYMS
tattva-vit--the knower of the Absolute Truth; tu--but; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; guna-karma--works under material influence;
vibhagayoh--differences; gunah--senses; gunesu--in sense gratification;
vartante--being engaged; iti--thus; matva--thinking; na--never;
sajjate--becomes attached.
TRANSLATION
One who is in knowledge of the Absolute Truth, O mighty-armed, does not
engage himself in the senses and sense gratification, knowing well the
differences between work in devotion and work for fruitive results.
PURPORT
The knower of the Absolute Truth is convinced of his awkward position
in material association. He knows that he is part and parcel of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and that his position should not
be in the material creation. He knows his real identity as part and
parcel of the Supreme, who is eternal bliss and knowledge, and he
realizes that somehow or other he is entrapped in the material
conception of life. In his pure state of existence he is meant to
dovetail his activities in devotional service to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna. He therefore engages himself in the
activities of Krsna consciousness and becomes naturally unattached to
the activities of the material senses, which are all circumstantial and
temporary. He knows that his material condition of life is under the
supreme control of the Lord; consequently he is not disturbed by all
kinds of material reactions, which he considers to be the mercy of the
Lord. According to Srimad-Bhagavatam, one who knows the Absolute Truth
in three different features--namely Brahman, Paramatma, and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead--is called tattva-vit, for he knows also his own
factual position in relationship with the Supreme.
TEXT 29
prakrter guna-sammudhah
sajjante guna-karmasu
tan akrtsna-vido mandan
krtsna-vin na vicalayet
SYNONYMS
prakrteh--impelled by the material modes; guna-sammudhah--befooled by
material identification; sajjante--become engaged; guna-karmasu--in
material activities; tan--all those; akrtsna-vidah--persons with a poor
fund of knowledge; mandan--lazy to understand self-realization; krtsna-
vit--one who is in factual knowledge; na--may not; vicalayet--try to
agitate.
TRANSLATION
Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage
themselves in material activities and become attached. But the wise
should not unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to the
performers' lack of knowledge.
PURPORT
Persons who are unknowledgeable falsely identify with gross material
consciousness and are full of material designations. This body is a
gift of the material nature, and one who is too much attached to the
bodily consciousness is called mandan, or a lazy person without
understanding of spirit soul. Ignorant men think of the body as the
self; bodily connections with others are accepted as kinsmanship, the
land in which the body is obtained is the object of worship; and the
formalities of religious rituals are considered ends in themselves.
Social work, nationalism, and altruism are some of the activities for
such materially designated persons. Under the spell of such
designations, they are always busy in the material field; for them
spiritual realization is a myth and so they are not interested. Such
bewildered persons may even be engaged in such primary moral principles
of life as nonviolence and similar materially benevolent work. Those
who are, however, enlightened in spiritual life, should not try to
agitate such materially engrossed persons. Better to prosecute one's
own spiritual activities silently.
Men who are ignorant cannot appreciate activities in Krsna
consciousness, and therefore Lord Krsna advises us not to disturb them
and simply waste valuable time. But the devotees of the Lord are more
kind than the Lord because they understand the purpose of the Lord.
Consequently they undertake all kinds of risks, even to the point of
approaching ignorant men to try to engage them in the acts of Krsna
consciousness, which are absolutely necessary for the human being.
TEXT 30
mayi sarvani karmani
sannyasyadhyatma-cetasa
nirasir nirmamo bhutva
yudhyasva vigata-jvarah
SYNONYMS
mayi--unto Me; sarvani--all sorts of; karmani--activities; sannyasya--
giving up completely; adhyatma--with full knowledge of the self;
cetasa--consciousness; nirasih--without desire for profit; nirmamah--
without ownership; bhutva--so being; yudhyasva--fight; vigata-jvarah--
without being lethargic.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Arjuna, surrendering all your works unto Me, with mind
intent on Me, and without desire for gain and free from egoism and
lethargy, fight.
PURPORT
This verse clearly indicates the purpose of the Bhagavad-gita. The Lord
instructs that one has to become fully Krsna conscious to discharge
duties, as if in military discipline. Such an injunction may make
things a little difficult; nevertheless duties must be carried out,
with dependence on Krsna, because that is the constitutional position
of the living entity. The living entity cannot be happy independent of
the cooperation of the Supreme Lord because the eternal constitutional
position of the living entity is to become subordinate to the desires
of the Lord. Arjuna was, therefore, ordered by Sri Krsna to fight as if
the Lord were his military commander. One has to sacrifice everything
for the good will of the Supreme Lord, and at the same time discharge
prescribed duties without claiming proprietorship. Arjuna did not have
to consider the order of the Lord; he had only to execute His order.
The Supreme Lord is the soul of all souls; therefore, one who depends
solely and wholly on the Supreme Soul without personal consideration,
or in other words, one who is fully Krsna conscious, is called
adhyatma-cetasa. Nirasih means that one has to act on the order of the
master. Nor should one ever expect fruitive results. The cashier may
count millions of dollars for his employer, but he does not claim a
cent for himself. Similarly, one has to realize that nothing in the
world belongs to any individual person, but that everything belongs to
the Supreme Lord. That is the real purport of mayi, or "unto Me." And
when one acts in such Krsna consciousness, certainly he does not claim
proprietorship over anything. This consciousness is called nirmama, or
"nothing is mine." And, if there is any reluctance to execute such a
stern order which is without consideration of so-called kinsmen in the
bodily relationship, that reluctance should be thrown off; in this way
one may become vigata-jvara or without feverish mentality or lethargy.
Everyone, according to his quality and position, has a particular type
of work to discharge, and all such duties may be discharged in Krsna
consciousness, as described above. That will lead one to the path of
liberation.
TEXT 31
ye me matam idam nityam
anutisthanti manavah
sraddhavanto 'nasuyanto
mucyante te 'pi karmabhih
SYNONYMS
ye--those; me--My; matam--injunctions; idam--this; nityam--eternal
function; anutisthanti--execute regularly; manavah--humankind; sraddha-
vantah--with faith and devotion; anasuyantah--without envy; mucyante--
become free; te--all of them; api--even; karmabhih--from the bondage of
the law of fruitive action.
TRANSLATION
One who execute his duties according to My injunctions and who follows
this teaching faithfully, without envy, becomes free from the bondage
of fruitive actions.
PURPORT
The injunction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the
essence of all Vedic wisdom, and therefore is eternally true without
exception. As the Vedas are eternal, so this truth of Krsna
consciousness is also eternal. One should have firm faith in this
injunction, without envying the Lord. There are many philosophers who
write comments on the Bhagavad-gita but have no faith in Krsna. They
will never be liberated from the bondage of fruitive action. But an
ordinary man with firm faith in the eternal injunctions of the Lord,
even though unable to execute such orders, becomes liberated from the
bondage of the law of karma. In the beginning of Krsna consciousness,
one may not fully discharge the injunctions of the Lord, but because
one is not resentful of this principle and works sincerely without
consideration of defeat and hopelessness, he will surely be promoted to
the stage of pure Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 32
ye tv etad abhyasuyanto
nanutisthanti me matam
sarva-jnana-vimudhams tan
viddhi nastan acetasah
SYNONYMS
ye--those; tu--however; etat--this; abhyasuyantah--out of envy; na--do
not; anutisthanti--regularly perform; me--My; matam--injunction; sarva-
jnana--all sorts of knowledge; vimudhan--perfectly befooled; tan--they
are; viddhi--know it well; nastan--all ruined; acetasah--without Krsna
consciousness.
TRANSLATION
But those who, out of envy disregard these teachings and do not
practice them regularly, are to be considered bereft of all knowledge,
befooled, and doomed to ignorance and bondage.
PURPORT
The flaw of not being Krsna conscious is clearly stated herein. As
there is punishment for disobedience to the order of the supreme
executive head, so there is certainly punishment for the disobedience
of the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A disobedient
person, however great he may be, is ignorant of his own self, of the
Supreme Brahman, and Paramatma and the Personality of Godhead, due to a
vacant heart. Therefore there is no hope of perfection of life for him.
TEXT 33
sadrsam cestate svasyah
prakrter jnanavan api
prakrtim yanti bhutani
nigrahah kim karisyati
SYNONYMS
sadrsam--accordingly; cestate--tries; svasyah--in one's own nature;
prakrteh--modes; jnana-van--learned; api--although; prakrtim--nature;
yanti--undergo; bhutani--all living entities; nigrahah--suppression;
kim--what; karisyati--can do.
TRANSLATION
Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for everyone
follows his nature. What can repression accomplish?
PURPORT
Unless one is situated on the transcendental platform of Krsna
consciousness he cannot get free from the influence of the modes of
material nature, as it is confirmed by the Lord in the Seventh Chapter
(7.14). Therefore, even for the most highly educated person on the
mundane plane, it is impossible to get out of the entanglement of maya
simply by theoretical knowledge, or by separating the soul from the
body. There are many so-called spiritualists who outwardly pose to be
advanced in the science, but inwardly or privately are completely under
the particular modes of nature which they are unable to surpass.
Academically, one may be very learned, but because of his long
association with material nature, he is in bondage. Krsna consciousness
helps one to get out of the material entanglement, even though one may
be engaged in his prescribed duties. Therefore, without being fully in
Krsna consciousness, no one should suddenly give up his prescribed
duties and become a so-called yogi or transcendentalist artificially.
It is better to be situated in one's position and try to attain Krsna
consciousness under superior training. Thus one may be freed from the
clutches of maya.
TEXT 34
indriyasyendriyasyarthe
raga-dvesau vyavasthitau
tayor na vasam agacchet
tau hy asya paripanthinau
SYNONYMS
indriyasya--of the senses; indriyasya arthe--in the sense objects;
raga--attachment; dvesau--also detachment; vyavasthitau--put under
regulations; tayoh--of them; na--never; vasam--control; agacchet--one
should come; tau--those; hi--certainly; asya--his; paripanthinau--
stumbling blocks.
TRANSLATION
Attraction and repulsion for sense objects are felt by embodied beings,
but one should not fall under the control of senses and sense objects
because they are stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization.
PURPORT
Those who are in Krsna consciousness are naturally reluctant to engage
in material sense gratification. But those who are not in such
consciousness should follow the rules and regulations of the revealed
scriptures. Unrestricted sense enjoyment is the cause of material
encagement, but one who follows the rules and regulations of the
revealed scriptures does not become entangled by the sense objects. For
example, sex enjoyment is a necessity for the conditioned soul, and sex
enjoyment is allowed under the license of marriage ties. For example,
according to scriptural injunctions, one is forbidden to engage in sex
relationships with any women other than one's wife. All other women are
to be considered as one's mother. But, in spite of such injunctions, a
man is still inclined to have sex relationships with other women. These
propensities are to be curbed; otherwise they will be stumbling blocks
on the path of self-realization. As long as the material body is there,
the necessities of the material body are allowed, but under rules and
regulations. And yet, we should not rely upon the control of such
allowances. One has to follow these rules and regulations, unattached
to them, because practice of sense gratification under regulations may
also lead one to go astray--as much as there is always the chance of an
accident, even on the royal roads. Although they may be very carefully
maintained, no one can guarantee that there will be no danger even on
the safest road. The sense enjoyment spirit has been current a very
long, long time, owing to material association. Therefore, in spite of
regulated sense enjoyment, there is every chance of falling down;
therefore any attachment for regulated sense enjoyment must also be
avoided by all means. But action in the loving service of Krsna
detaches one from all kinds of sensory activities. Therefore, no one
should try to be detached from Krsna consciousness at any stage of
life. The whole purpose of detachment from all kinds of sense
attachment is ultimately to become situated on the platform of Krsna
consciousness.
TEXT 35
sreyan sva-dharmo vigunah
para-dharmat sv-anusthitat
sva-dharme nidhanam sreyah
para-dharmo bhayavahah
SYNONYMS
sreyan--far better; sva-dharmah--one's prescribed duties; vigunah--even
faulty; para-dharmat--from duties mentioned for others; su-anusthitat--
than perfectly done; sva-dharme--in one's prescribed duties; nidhanam--
destruction; sreyah--better; para-dharmah--duties prescribed for
others; bhaya-avahah--dangerous.
TRANSLATION
It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though they
may be faultily, than another's duties. Destruction in the course of
performing one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duties,
for to follow another's path is dangerous.
PURPORT
One should therefore discharge his prescribed duties in full Krsna
consciousness rather than those prescribed for others. Prescribed
duties complement one's psychophysical condition, under the spell of
the modes of material nature. Spiritual duties are as ordered by the
spiritual master, for the transcendental service of Krsna. But both
materially or spiritually, one should stick to his prescribed duties
even up to death, rather than imitate another's prescribed duties.
Duties on the spiritual platform and duties on the material platform
may be different, but the principle of following the authorized
direction is always good for the performer. When one is under the spell
of the modes of material nature, one should follow the prescribed rules
for particular situations and should not imitate others. For example, a
brahmana, who is in the mode of goodness, is nonviolent, whereas a
ksatriya, who is in the mode of passion, is allowed to be violent. As
such, for a ksatriya it is better to be vanquished following the rules
of violence than to imitate a brahmana who follows the principles of
nonviolence. Everyone has to cleanse his heart by a gradual process,
not abruptly. However, when one transcends the modes of material nature
and is fully situated in Krsna consciousness, he can perform anything
and everything under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master.
In that complete stage of Krsna consciousness, the ksatriya may act as
a brahmana, or a brahmana may act as a ksatriya. In the transcendental
stage, the distinctions of the material world do not apply. For
example, Visvamitra was originally a ksatriya, but later on he acted as
a brahmana, whereas Parasurama was a brahmana, but later on he acted as
a ksatriya. Being transcendentally situated, they could do so; but as
long as one is on the material platform, he must perform his duties
according to the modes of material nature. At the same time, he must
have a full sense of Krsna consciousness.
TEXT 36
arjuna uvaca
atha kena prayukto 'yam
papam carati purusah
anicchann api varsneya
balad iva niyojitah
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; atha--hereafter; kena--by what; prayuktah--
impelled; ayam--one; papam--sins; carati--acts; purusah--a man;
anicchan--without desiring; api--although; varsneya--O descendant of
Vrsni; balat--by force; iva--as if; niyojitah--engaged.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: O descendant of Vrsni, by what is one impelled to sinful
acts, even unwillingly, as if engaged by force?
PURPORT
A living entity, as part and parcel of the Supreme, is originally
spiritual, pure, and free from all material contaminations. Therefore,
by nature he is not subjected to the sins of the material world. But
when he is in contact with the material nature, he acts in many sinful
ways without hesitation, and sometimes even against his will. As such,
Arjuna's question to Krsna is very sanguine, as to the perverted nature
of the living entities. Although the living entity sometimes does not
want to act in sin, he is still forced to act. Sinful actions are not,
however, impelled by the Supersoul within, but are due to another
cause, as the Lord explains in the next verse.
TEXT 37
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kama esa krodha esa
rajo-guna-samudbhavah
mahasano maha-papma
viddhy enam iha vairinam
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kamah--lust; esah-
-all these; krodhah--wrath; esah--all these; rajah-guna--the mode of
passion; samudbhavah--born of; maha-asanah--all-devouring; maha-papma--
greatly sinful; viddhi--know; enam--this; iha--in the material world;
vairinam--greatest enemy.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of
contact with the material mode of passion and later transformed into
wrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world.
PURPORT
When a living entity comes in contact with the material creation, his
eternal love for Krsna is transformed into lust, in association with
the mode of passion. Or, in other words, the sense of love of God
becomes transformed into lust, as milk in contact with sour tamarind is
transformed into yogurt. Then again, when lust is unsatisfied, it turns
into wrath; wrath is transformed into illusion, and illusion continues
the material existence. Therefore, lust is the greatest enemy of the
living entity, and it is lust only which induces the pure living entity
to remain entangled in the material world. Wrath is the manifestation
of the mode of ignorance; these modes exhibit themselves as wrath and
other corollaries. If, therefore, the mode of passion, instead of being
degraded into the mode of ignorance, is elevated to the mode of
goodness by the prescribed method of living and acting, then one can be
saved from the degradation of wrath by spiritual attachment.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead expanded Himself into many for His
ever-increasing spiritual bliss, and the living entities are parts and
parcels of this spiritual bliss. They also have partial independence,
but by misuse of their independence, when the service attitude is
transformed into the propensity for sense enjoyment, they come under
the sway of lust. This material creation is created by the Lord to give
a facility to the conditioned souls to fulfill these lustful
propensities, and when they are completely baffled by prolonged lustful
activities, the living entities begin to inquire about their real
position.
This inquiry is the beginning of the Vedanta-sutras, wherein it is
said, athato brahma-jijnasa: one should inquire into the Supreme. And
the Supreme is defined in the Srimad-Bhagavatam as janmady asya yato
'nvayad itaratas ca, or, "The origin of everything is the Supreme
Brahman." Therefore, the origin of lust is also in the Supreme. If,
therefore, lust is transformed into love for the Supreme, or
transformed into Krsna consciousness--or, in other words, desiring
everything for Krsna--then both lust and wrath can be spiritualized.
Hanuman, the greatest servitor of Lord Rama, engaged his wrath upon his
enemies for the satisfaction of the Lord. Therefore, lust and wrath,
when they are employed in Krsna consciousness, become our friends
instead of our enemies.
TEXT 38
dhumenavriyate vahnir
yathadarso malena ca
yatholbenavrto garbhas
tatha tenedam avrtam
SYNONYMS
dhumena--by smoke; avriyate--covered; vahnih--fire; yatha--just as;
adarsah--mirror; malena--by dust; ca--also; yatha--just as; ulbena--by
the womb; avrtah--is covered; garbhah--embryo; tatha--so; tena--by that
lust; idam--this; avrtam--is covered.
TRANSLATION
As fire is covered by smoke, as a mirror is covered by dust, or as the
embryo is covered by the womb, similarly, the living entity is covered
by different degrees of this lust.
PURPORT
There are three degrees of covering of the living entity by which his
pure consciousness is obscured. This covering is but lust under
different manifestations like smoke in the fire, dust on the mirror,
and the womb about the embryo. When lust is compared to smoke, it is
understood that the fire of the living spark can be a little perceived.
In other words when the living entity exhibits his Krsna consciousness
slightly, he may be likened to the fire covered by smoke. Although fire
is necessary where there is smoke, there is no overt manifestation of
fire in the early stage. This stage is like the beginning of Krsna
consciousness. The dust on the mirror refers to a cleansing process of
the mirror of the mind by so many spiritual methods. The best process
is to chant the holy names of the Lord. The embryo covered by the womb
is an analogy illustrating a helpless position, for the child in the
womb is so helpless that he cannot even move. This stage of living
condition can be compared to that of the trees. The trees are also
living entities, but they have been put in such a condition of life by
such a great exhibition of lust that they are almost void of all
consciousness. The covered mirror is compared to the birds and beasts,
and the smoke covered fire is compared to the human being. In the form
of a human being, the living entity may revive a little Krsna
consciousness, and, if he makes further development, the fire of
spiritual life can be kindled in the human form of life. By careful
handling of the smoke in the fire, the fire can be made to blaze.
Therefore the human form of life is a chance for the living entity to
escape the entanglement of material existence. In the human form of
life, one can conquer the enemy, lust, by cultivation of Krsna
consciousness under able guidance.
TEXT 39
avrtam jnanam etena
jnanino nitya-vairina
kama-rupena kaunteya
duspurenanalena ca
SYNONYMS
avrtam--covered; jnanam--pure consciousness; etena--by this; jnaninah--
of the knower; nitya-vairina--eternal enemy; kama-rupena--in the form
of lust; kaunteya--O son of Kunti; duspurena--never to be satisfied;
analena--by the fire; ca--also.
TRANSLATION
Thus, a man's pure consciousness is covered by his eternal enemy in the
form of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like fire.
PURPORT
It is said in the Manu-smrti that lust cannot be satisfied by any
amount of sense enjoyment, just as fire is never extinguished by a
constant supply of fuel. In the material world, the center of all
activities is sex, and thus this material world is called maithunya-
agara, or the shackles of sex life. In the ordinary prison house,
criminals are kept within bars; similarly, the criminals who are
disobedient to the laws of the Lord are shackled by sex life.
Advancement of material civilization on the basis of sense
gratification means increasing the duration of the material existence
of a living entity. Therefore, this lust is the symbol of ignorance by
which the living entity is kept within the material world. While one
enjoys sense gratification, it may be that there is some feeling of
happiness, but actually that so-called feeling of happiness is the
ultimate enemy of the sense enjoyer.
TEXT 40
indriyani mano buddhir
asyadhisthanam ucyate
etair vimohayaty esa
jnanam avrtya dehinam
SYNONYMS
indriyani--the senses; manah--the mind; buddhih--the intelligence;
asya--of the lust; adhisthanam--sitting place; ucyate--called; etaih--
by all these; vimohayati--bewilders; esah--of this; jnanam--knowledge;
avrtya--covering; dehinam--the embodied.
TRANSLATION
The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of
this lust, which veils the real knowledge of the living entity and
bewilders him.
PURPORT
The enemy has captured different strategic positions in the body of the
conditioned soul, and therefore Lord Krsna is giving hints of those
places, so that one who wants to conquer the enemy may know where he
can be found. Mind is the center of all the activities of the senses,
and thus the mind is the reservoir of all ideas of sense gratification;
and, as a result, the mind and the senses become the repositories of
lust. Next, the intelligence department becomes the capital of such
lustful propensities. Intelligence is the immediate next-door neighbor
of the spirit soul. Lusty intelligence influences the spirit soul to
acquire the false ego and identify itself with matter, and thus with
the mind and the senses. The spirit soul becomes addicted to enjoying
the material senses and mistakes this as true happiness. This false
identification of the spirit soul is very nicely explained in the
Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.84.13):
yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih
yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
janesv abhijnesu sa eva go-kharah
"A human being who identifies this body made of three elements with his
self, who considers the by-products of the body to be his kinsmen, who
considers the land of birth as worshipable, and who goes to the place
of pilgrimage simply to take a bath rather than meet men of
transcendental knowledge there, is to be considered as an ass or a cow.
TEXT 41
tasmat tvam indriyany adau
niyamya bharatarsabha
papmanam prajahi hy enam
jnana-vijnana-nasanam
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; 
tvam--you; 
indriyani--senses; 
adau--in 
the
beginning; niyamya--by regulating; bharata-rsabha--O chief amongst the
descendants of Bharata; papmanam--the great symbol of sin; prajahi--
curb; hi--certainly; enam--this; jnana--knowledge; vijnana--scientific
knowledge of the pure soul; nasanam--the destroyer.
TRANSLATION
Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning curb
this great symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay this
destroyer of knowledge and self-realization.
PURPORT
The Lord advised Arjuna to regulate the senses from the very beginning
so that he could curb the greatest sinful enemy, lust, which destroys
the urge for self-realization and specifically knowledge of the self.
Jnana refers to knowledge of self as distinguished from non-self, or,
in other words, knowledge that the spirit soul is not the body. Vijnana
refers to specific knowledge of the spirit soul and knowledge of one's
constitutional position and his relationship to the Supreme Soul. It is
explained thus in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (2.9.31):
jnanam parama-guhyam me
yad vijnana-samanvitam
sa-rahasyam tad-angam ca
grhana gaditam maya
"The knowledge of the self and the Supreme Self is very confidential
and mysterious, being veiled by maya, but such knowledge and specific
realization can be understood if it is explained by the Lord Himself."
Bhagavad-gita gives us that knowledge, specifically knowledge of the
self. The living entities are parts and parcels of the Lord, and
therefore they are simply meant to serve the Lord. This consciousness
is called Krsna consciousness. So, from the very beginning of life one
has to learn this Krsna consciousness, and thereby one may become fully
Krsna conscious and act accordingly.
Lust is only the perverted reflection of love of God which is natural
for every living entity. But if one is educated in Krsna consciousness
from the very beginning, that natural love of God cannot deteriorate
into lust. When love of God deteriorates into lust, it is very
difficult to return to the normal condition. Nonetheless, Krsna
consciousness is so powerful that even a late beginner can become a
lover of God by following the regulative principles of devotional
service. So, from any stage of life, or from the time of understanding
its urgency, one can begin regulating the senses in Krsna
consciousness, devotional service of the Lord, and turn the lust into
love of Godhead--the highest perfectional stage of human life.
TEXT 42
indriyani parany ahur
indriyebhyah param manah
manasas tu para buddhir
yo buddheh paratas tu sah
SYNONYMS
indriyani--senses; parani--superior; ahuh--is said; indriyebhyah--more
than the senses; param--superior; manah--the mind; manasah--more than
the mind; tu--also; para--superior; buddhih--intelligence; yah--one
who; buddheh--more than the intelligence; paratah--superior; tu--but;
sah--he.
TRANSLATION
The working senses are superior to dull matter; mind is higher than the
senses; intelligence is still higher than the mind; and he [the soul]
is even higher than the intelligence.
PURPORT
The senses are different outlets for the activities of lust. Lust is
reserved within the body, but it is given vent through the senses.
Therefore, the senses are superior to the body as a whole. These
outlets are not in use when there is superior consciousness, or Krsna
consciousness. In Krsna consciousness the soul makes direct connection
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the bodily
functions, as described here, ultimately end in the Supreme Soul.
Bodily action means the functions of the senses, and stopping the
senses means stopping all bodily actions. But since the mind is active,
then, even though the body may be silent and at rest, the mind will
act--as it does during dreaming. But, above the mind there is the
determination of the intelligence, and above the intelligence is the
soul proper. If, therefore, the soul is directly engaged with the
Supreme, naturally all other subordinates, namely, the intelligence,
mind and the senses, will be automatically engaged. In the Katha
Upanisad there is a passage, in which it is said that the objects of
sense gratification are superior to the senses, and mind is superior to
the sense objects. If, therefore, the mind is directly engaged in the
service of the Lord constantly, then there is no chance of the senses
becoming engaged in other ways. This mental attitude has already been
explained. If the mind is engaged in the transcendental service of the
Lord, there is no chance of its being engaged in the lower
propensities. In the Katha Upanisad the soul has been described as
mahan, the great. Therefore the soul is above all--namely, the sense
objects, the senses, the mind and the intelligence. Therefore, directly
understanding the constitutional position of the soul is the solution
of the whole problem.
With intelligence one has to seek out the constitutional position of
the soul and then engage the mind always in Krsna consciousness. That
solves the whole problem. A neophyte spiritualist is generally advised
to keep aloof from the objects of the senses. One has to strengthen the
mind by use of intelligence. If by intelligence one engages one's mind
in Krsna consciousness, by complete surrender unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, then, automatically, the mind becomes stronger,
and even though the senses are very strong, like serpents, they will be
no more effective than serpents with broken fangs. But even though the
soul is the master of intelligence and mind, and the senses also,
still, unless it is strengthened by association with Krsna in Krsna
consciousness, there is every chance of falling down due to the
agitated mind.
TEXT 43
evam buddheh param buddhva
samstabhyatmanam atmana
jahi satrum maha-baho
kama-rupam durasadam
SYNONYMS
evam--thus; buddheh--of intelligence; param--superior; buddhva--so
knowing; samstabhya--by steadying; atmanam--of the mind; atmana--by
deliberate intelligence; jahi--conquer; satrum--the enemy; maha-baho--O
mighty-armed one; kama-rupam--the form of lust; durasadam--formidable.
TRANSLATION
Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind and
intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher self and
thus--by spiritual strength--conquer this insatiable enemy known as
lust.
PURPORT
This Third Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita is conclusively directive to
Krsna consciousness by knowing oneself as the eternal servitor of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, without considering impersonal voidness
as the ultimate end. In the material existence of life, one is
certainly influenced by propensities for lust and desire for dominating
the resources of material nature. Desire for overlording and sense
gratification are the greatest enemies of the conditioned soul; but by
the strength of Krsna consciousness, one can control the material
senses, the mind and the intelligence. One may not give up work and
prescribed duties all of a sudden; but by gradually developing Krsna
consciousness, one can be situated in a transcendental position without
being influenced by the material senses and the mind--by steady
intelligence directed toward one's pure identity. This is the sum total
of this chapter. In the immature stage of material existence,
philosophical speculations and artificial attempts to control the
senses by the so-called practice of yogic postures can never help a man
toward spiritual life. He must be trained in Krsna consciousness by
higher intelligence.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Third Chapter of the Srimad
Bhagavad-gita in the matter of  Karma-yoga, or the Discharge of One's
Prescribed Duty in Krsna Consciousness.
Bhagavad-gita As It Is by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for
personal non-commercial use only, under the fair use guidelines
established by international copyright laws. You may use this
electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works,
research, student papers, presentations, and the like. You can
distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long as
you keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more
than ten percent (10%) of this book in any media without the express
written permission from the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts
in the following way: Excerpted from Bhagavad-gita As It Is by A.C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, www.Krishna.com.
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to
evaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of
the publishers, www.Krishna.com.