Chapter 11
The Universal Form
TEXT 1
arjuna uvaca
mad-anugrahaya paramam
guhyam adhyatma-samjnitam
yat tvayoktam vacas tena
moho 'yam vigato mama
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; mat-anugrahaya--just show me favor;
paramam--supreme; guhyam--confidential; adhyatma--spiritual; samjnitam-
-in the matter of; yat--what; tvaya--by You; uktam--said; vacah--words;
tena--by that; mohah--illusion; ayam--this; vigatah--is educated; mama-
-my.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: I have heard Your instruction on confidential spiritual
matters which You have so kindly delivered unto me, and my illusion is
now dispelled.
PURPORT
This chapter reveals Krsna as the cause of all causes. He is even the
cause of the Maha-Visnu, and from Him the material universes emanate.
Krsna is not an incarnation; He is the source of all incarnations. That
has been completely explained in the last chapter.
Now, as far as Arjuna is concerned, he says that his illusion is over.
This means that Arjuna no longer thinks of Krsna as a mere human being,
as a friend of his, but as the source of everything. Arjuna is very
enlightened and is glad that he has a great friend like Krsna, but now
he is thinking that although he may accept Krsna as the source of
everything, others may not. So in order to establish Krsna's divinity
for all, he is requesting Krsna in this chapter to show His universal
form. Actually when one sees the universal form of Krsna one becomes
frightened, like Arjuna, but Krsna is so kind that after showing it He
converts Himself again into His original form. Arjuna agrees to what
Krsna has said several times. Krsna is speaking to him just for his
benefit, and Arjuna acknowledges that all this is happening to him by
Krsna's grace. He is now convinced that Krsna is the cause of all
causes and is present in everyone's heart as the Supersoul.
TEXT 2
bhavapyayau hi bhutanam
srutau vistaraso maya
tvattah kamala-patraksa
mahatmyam api cavyayam
SYNONYMS
bhava--appearance; apyayau--disappearance; hi--certainly; bhutanam--of
all living entities; srutau--have heard; vistarasah--detail; maya--by
me; tvattah--from You; kamala-patra-aksa--O lotus-eyed one; mahatmyam--
glories; api--also; ca--and; avyayam--inexhaustible.
TRANSLATION
O lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance
and disappearance of every living entity, as realized through Your
inexhaustible glories.
PURPORT
Arjuna addresses Lord Krsna as "lotus-eyed" (Krsna's eyes appear just
like the petals of a lotus flower) out of his joy, for Krsna has
assured him, in the last verse of the previous chapter, that He
sustains the entire universe with just a fragment of Himself. He is the
source of everything in this material manifestation, and Arjuna has
heard of this from the Lord in detail. Arjuna further knows that in
spite of His being the source of all appearances and disappearances, He
is aloof from them. His personality is not lost, although He is all-
pervading. That is the inconceivable opulence of Krsna which Arjuna
admits that he has thoroughly understood.
TEXT 3
evam etad yathattha tvam
atmanam paramesvara
drastum icchami te rupam
aisvaram purusottama
SYNONYMS
evam--that; etat--this; yatha--as it is; attha--have spoken; tvam--You;
atmanam--the soul; parama-isvara--the Supreme Lord; drastum--to see;
icchami--I wish; te--You; rupam--form; aisvaram--divine; purusa-uttama-
-O best of personalities.
TRANSLATION
O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see here
before me Your actual position, I wish to see how You have entered into
this cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of Yours.
PURPORT
The Lord said that because He entered into the material universe by His
personal representation, the cosmic manifestation has been made
possible and is going on. Now as far as Arjuna is concerned, he is
inspired by the statements of Krsna, but in order to convince others in
the future who may think that Krsna is an ordinary person, he desires
to see Him actually in His universal form, to see how He is acting from
within the universe, although He is apart from it. Arjuna's asking the
Lord's permission is also significant. Since the Lord is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, He is present within Arjuna himself; therefore
He knows the desire of Arjuna, and He can understand that Arjuna has no
special desire to see Him in His universal form, for he is completely
satisfied to see Him in His personal form of Krsna. But He can
understand also that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to convince
others. He did not have any personal desire for confirmation. Krsna
also understands that Arjuna wants to see the universal form to set a
criterion, for in the future there would be so many imposters who would
pose themselves as incarnations of God. The people, therefore, should
be careful; one who claims to be Krsna should be prepared to show his
universal form to confirm his claim to the people.
TEXT 4
manyase yadi tac chakyam
maya drastum iti prabho
yogesvara tato me tvam
darsayatmanam avyayam
SYNONYMS
manyase--if You think; yadi--if; tat--that; sakyam--able to see; maya--
by me; drastum--to see; iti--thus; prabho--O Lord; yoga-isvara--O Lord
of all mystic power; tatah--then; me--unto me; tvam--You; darsaya--
show; atmanam--Yourself; avyayam--eternal.
TRANSLATION
If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O
master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that universal Self.
PURPORT
It is said that one can neither see, hear, understand nor perceive the
Supreme Lord, Krsna, by the material senses. But if one is engaged in
loving transcendental service to the Lord from the beginning, then one
can see the Lord by revelation. Every living entity is only a spiritual
spark; therefore it is not possible to see or to understand the Supreme
Lord. Arjuna, as a devotee, does not depend on his speculative
strength; rather, he admits his limitations as a living entity and
acknowledges Krsna's inestimable position. Arjuna could understand that
for a living entity it is not possible to understand the unlimited
infinite. If the infinite reveals Himself, then it is possible to
understand the nature of the infinite by the grace of the infinite. The
word yogesvara is also very significant here because the Lord has
inconceivable power. If He likes, He can reveal Himself by His grace,
although He is unlimited. Therefore Arjuna pleads for the inconceivable
grace of Krsna. He does not give Krsna orders. Krsna is not obliged to
reveal Himself to anyone unless one surrenders fully in Krsna
consciousness and engages in devotional service. Thus it is not
possible for persons who depend on the strength of their mental
speculations to see Krsna.
TEXT 5
sri-bhagavan uvaca
pasya me partha rupani
sataso 'tha sahasrasah
nana-vidhani divyani
nana-varnakrtini ca
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; pasya--
just see; me--Mine; partha--O son of Prtha; rupani--forms; satasah--
hundreds; atha--also; sahasrasah--thousands; nana-vidhani--variegated;
divyani--divine; nana--variegated; varna--colors; akrtini--forms; ca--
also.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Prtha, behold now My
opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine forms, multicolored
like the sea.
PURPORT
Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in His universal form, which, although a
transcendental form, is just manifested for the cosmic manifestation
and is therefore subject to the temporary time of this material nature.
As the material nature is manifested and not manifested, similarly this
universal form of Krsna is manifested and nonmanifested. It is not
eternally situated in the spiritual sky like Krsna's other forms. As
far as a devotee is concerned, he is not eager to see the universal
form, but because Arjuna wanted to see Krsna in this way, Krsna reveals
this form. This universal form is not possible to be seen by any
ordinary man. Krsna must give one the power to see it.
TEXT 6
pasyadityan vasun rudran
asvinau marutas tatha
bahuny adrsta-purvani
pasyascaryani bharata
SYNONYMS
pasya--see; adityan--the twelve sons of Aditi; vasun--the eight Vasus;
rudran--the eleven forms of Rudra; asvinau--the two Asvinis; marutah--
the forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tatha--also; bahuni--
many; adrsta--that you have not head or seen; purvani--before; pasya--
there see; ascaryani--all the wonderful; bharata--O best of the
Bharatas.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Bharatas, see here the different manifestations of
Adityas, Rudras, and all the demigods. Behold the many things which no
one has ever seen or heard before.
PURPORT
Even though Arjuna was a personal friend of Krsna and the most advanced
of learned men, it was still not possible for him to know everything
about Krsna. Here it is stated that humans have neither heard nor known
of all these forms and manifestations. Now Krsna reveals these
wonderful forms.
TEXT 7
ihaika-stham jagat krtsnam
pasyadya sa-caracaram
mama dehe gudakesa
yac canyad drastum icchasi
SYNONYMS
iha--in this; eka-stham--in one; jagat--the universe; krtsnam--
completely; pasya--see; adya--immediately; sa--with; cara--moving;
acaram--not moving; mama--My; dehe--in this body; gudakesa--O Arjuna;
yat--that; ca--also; anyat--other; drastum--to see; icchasi--you like.
TRANSLATION
Whatever you wish to see can be seen all at once in this body. This
universal form can show you all that you now desire, as well as
whatever you may desire in the future. Everything is here completely.
PURPORT
No one can see the entire universe sitting in one place. Even the most
advanced scientist cannot see what is going on in other parts of the
universe. But a devotee like Arjuna can see everything that exists in
any part of the universe. Krsna gives him the power to see anything he
wants to see, past, present and future. Thus by the mercy of Krsna,
Arjuna is able to see everything.
TEXT 8
na tu mam sakyase drastum
anenaiva sva-caksusa
divyam dadami te caksuh
pasya me yogam aisvaram
SYNONYMS
na--never; tu--but; mam--Me; sakyase--able; drastum--to see; anena--by
this; eva--certainly; sva-caksusa--with your own eyes; divyam--divine;
dadami--I give; te--you; caksuh--eyes; pasya--see; me--My; yogam
aisvaram--inconceivable mystic power.
TRANSLATION
But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you
divine eyes by which you can behold My mystic opulence!
PURPORT
A pure devotee does not like to see Krsna in any form except His form
with two hands; a devotee must see His universal form by His grace, not
with the mind but with spiritual eyes. To see the universal form of
Krsna, Arjuna is told not to change his mind but his vision. The
universal form of Krsna is not very important; that will be clear in
the verses. Yet because Arjuna wanted to see it, the Lord gives him the
particular vision required to see that universal form.
Devotees who are correctly situated in a transcendental relationship
with Krsna are attracted by loving features, not by a godless display
of opulences. The playmates of Krsna, the friends of Krsna and the
parents of Krsna never want Krsna to show His opulences. They are so
immersed in pure love that they do not even know that Krsna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In their loving exchange they forget
that Krsna is the Supreme Lord. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated
that the boys who play with Krsna are all highly pious souls, and after
many, many births they are able to play with Krsna. Such boys do not
know that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They take Him as
a personal friend. The Supreme Person is considered the impersonal
Brahman by great sages, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead by the
devotees, and as a product of this material nature by ordinary men. The
fact is that the devotee is not concerned to see the visva-rupa, the
universal form, but Arjuna wanted to see it to substantiate Krsna's
statement so that in the future people could understand that Krsna not
only theoretically or philosophically presented Himself as the Supreme
but actually presented Himself as such to Arjuna. Arjuna must confirm
this because Arjuna is the beginning of the parampara system. Those who
are actually interested to understanding the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Krsna, and who follow in the footsteps of Arjuna should
understand that Krsna not only theoretically presented Himself as the
Supreme, but actually revealed Himself as the Supreme.
The Lord gave Arjuna the necessary power to see His universal form
because He knew that Arjuna did not particularly want to see it, as we
have already explained.
TEXT 9
sanjaya uvaca
evam uktva tato rajan
maha-yogesvaro harih
darsayam asa parthaya
paramam rupam aisvaram
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; evam--thus; uktva--saying; tatah--
thereafter; rajan--O King; maha-yoga-isvarah--the most powerful mystic;
harih--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; darsayam asa--showed;
parthaya--unto Arjuna; paramam--divine; rupam--universal form;
aisvaram--opulences.
TRANSLATION
Sanjaya said: O King, speaking thus, the Supreme, the Lord of all
mystic power, the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal form
to Arjuna.
TEXTS 10-11
aneka-vaktra-nayanam
anekadbhuta-darsanam
aneka-divyabharanam
divyanekodyatayudham
divya-malyambara-dharam
divya-gandhanulepanam
sarvascarya-mayam devam
anantam visvato-mukham
SYNONYMS
aneka--various; vaktra--mouths; nayanam--eyes; aneka--various; adbhuta-
-wonderful; darsanam--sights; aneka--many; divya--divine; abharanam--
ornaments; divya--divine; aneka--various; udyata--uplifted; ayudham--
weapons; divya--divine; malya--garlands; ambara dharam--covered with
the dresses; divya--divine; gandha--fragrance; anulepanam--smeared;
sarva--all; ascarya-mayam--wonderful; devam--shining; anantam--
unlimited; visvatah-mukham--all-pervading.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths and unlimited eyes.
It was all wondrous. The form was decorated with divine, dazzling
ornaments and arrayed in many garbs. He was garlanded gloriously, and
there were many scents smeared over His body. All was magnificent, all-
expanding, unlimited. This was seen by Arjuna.
PURPORT
These two verses indicate that there is no limit to the hands, mouths,
legs, etc., of the Lord. These manifestations are distributed
throughout the universe and are unlimited. By the grace of the Lord,
Arjuna could see them while sitting in one place. That is due to the
inconceivable potency of Krsna.
TEXT 12
divi surya-sahasrasya
bhaved yugapad utthita
yadi bhah sadrsi sa syad
bhasas tasya mahatmanah
SYNONYMS
divi--in the sky; surya--sun; sahasrasya--of many thousands; bhavet--
there were; yugapat--simultaneously; utthita--present; yadi--if; bhah--
light; sadrsi--like that; sa--that; syat--may be; bhasah--effulgence;
tasya--there is; maha-atmanah--of the great Lord.
TRANSLATION
If hundreds of thousands of suns rose up at once into the sky, they
might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal
form.
PURPORT
What Arjuna saw was indescribable, yet Sanjaya is trying to give a
mental picture of that great revelation to Dhrtarastra. Neither Sanjaya
nor Dhrtarastra was present, but Sanjaya, by the grace of Vyasa, could
see whatever happened. Thus he now compares the situation, as far as it
can be understood, to an imaginable phenomenon (i.e. thousands of
suns).
TEXT 13
tatraika-stham jagat krtsnam
pravibhaktam anekadha
apasyad deva-devasya
sarire pandavas tada
SYNONYMS
tatra--there; eka-stham--one place; jagat--universe; krtsnam--
completely; pravibhaktam--divided in; anekadha--many kinds; apasyat--
could see; deva-devasya--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarire-
-in the universal form; pandavah--Arjuna; tada--at that time.
TRANSLATION
At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the
unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place although
divided into many, many thousands.
PURPORT
The word tatra (there) is very significant. It indicates that both
Arjuna and Krsna were sitting on the chariot when Arjuna saw the
universal form. Others on the battlefield could not see this form
because Krsna gave the vision only to Arjuna. Arjuna could see in the
body of Krsna many thousands of universes. As we learn from Vedic
scriptures, there are many universes and many planets. Some of them are
made of earth, some are made of gold, some are made of jewels, some are
very great, some are not so great, etc. Sitting on his chariot, Arjuna
could see all these universes. But no one could understand what was
going on between Arjuna and Krsna.
TEXT 14
tatah sa vismayavisto
hrsta-roma dhananjayah
pranamya sirasa devam
krtanjalir abhasata
SYNONYMS
tatah--thereafter; sah--he; vismaya-avistah--being overwhelmed with
wonder; hrsta-roma--with his bodily hairs standing on end due to his
great ecstasy; dhananjayah--Arjuna; pranamya--offering obeisances;
sirasa--with the head; devam--to the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
krta-anjalih--with folded hands; abhasata--began to say.
TRANSLATION
Then, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna began
to pray with folded hands, offering obeisances to the Supreme Lord.
PURPORT
Once the divine vision is revealed, the relationship between Krsna and
Arjuna changes immediately. Before, Krsna and Arjuna had a relationship
based on friendship, but here, after the revelation, Arjuna is offering
obeisances with great respect, and with folded hands he is praying to
Krsna. He is praising the universal form. Thus Arjuna's relationship
becomes one of wonder rather than friendship. Great devotees see Krsna
as the reservoir of all relationships. In the scriptures there are
twelve basic kinds of relationships mentioned, and all of them are
present in Krsna. It is said that He is the ocean of all the
relationships exchanged between two living entities, between the gods,
or between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.
It is said that Arjuna was inspired by the relationship of wonder, and
in that wonder, although he was by nature very sober, calm and quiet,
he became ecstatic, his hair stood up, and he began to offer his
obeisances unto the Supreme Lord with folded hands. He was not, of
course, afraid. He was affected by the wonders of the Supreme Lord. The
immediate context is wonder; his natural loving friendship was
overwhelmed by wonder, and thus he reacted in this way.
TEXT 15
arjuna uvaca
pasyami devams tava deva dehe
sarvams tatha bhuta-visesa-sanghan
brahmanam isam kamalasana-stham
rsims ca sarvan uragams ca divyan
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; pasyami--I see; devan--all the demigods;
tava--Your; deva--O Lord; dehe--in the body; sarvan--all; tatha--also;
bhuta--living entities; visesa-sanghan--specifically assembled;
brahmanam--Lord Brahma; isam--Lord Siva; kamala-asana-stham--sitting on
the lotus flower; rsin--great sages; ca--also; sarvan--all; uragan--
serpents; ca--also; divyan--divine.
TRANSLATION
Arjuna said: My dear Lord Krsna, I see assembled together in Your body
all the demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahma
sitting on the lotus flower as well as Lord Siva and many sages and
divine serpents.
PURPORT
Arjuna sees everything in the universe; therefore he sees Brahma, who
is the first creature in the universe, and the celestial serpent upon
which the Garbhodakasayi Visnu lies in the lower regions of the
universe. This snake bed is called Vasuki. There are also other snakes
known as Vasuki. Arjuna can see from the Garbhodakasayi Visnu up to the
topmost part of the universe on the lotus-flower planet where Brahma,
the first creature of the universe, resides. That means that from the
beginning to the end, everything could be seen by Arjuna sitting in one
place on his chariot. This was possible by the grace of the Supreme
Lord, Krsna.
TEXT 16
aneka-bahudara-vaktra-netram
pasyami tvam sarvato 'nanta-rupam
nantam na madhyam na punas tavadim
pasyami visvesvara visva-rupa
SYNONYMS
aneka--many; bahu--arms; udara--bellies; vaktra--mouths; netram--eyes;
pasyami--I see; tvam--unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; ananta-rupam-
-unlimited form; na antam--there is no end; na madhyam--there is no
middle; na punah--nor again; tava--Your; adim--beginning; pasyami--I
see; visva-isvara--O Lord of the universe; visva-rupa--in the form of
the universe.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of the universe, I see in Your universal body many, many forms--
bellies, mouths, eyes--expanded without limit. There is no end, there
is no beginning, and there is no middle to all this.
PURPORT
Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is unlimited; thus
through Him everything could be seen.
TEXT 17
kiritinam gadinam cakrinam ca
tejo-rasim sarvato diptimantam
pasyami tvam durniriksyam samantad
diptanalarka-dyutim aprameyam
SYNONYMS
kiritinam--with helmets; gadinam--with maces; cakrinam--with discs; ca-
-and; tejah-rasim--effulgence; sarvatah--all sides; dipti-mantam--
glowing; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; durniriksyam--difficult to see;
samantat--spreading; dipta-anala--blazing fire; arka--sun; dyutim--
sunshine; aprameyam--immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
Your form, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs, is difficult
to see because of its glaring effulgence, which is fiery and
immeasurable like the sun.
TEXT 18
tvam aksaram paramam veditavyam
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanam
tvam avyayah sasvata-dharma-gopta
sanatanas tvam puruso mato me
SYNONYMS
tvam--You; aksaram--inexhaustible; paramam--supreme; veditavyam--to be
understood; tvam--You; asya--of this; visvasya--of the universe; param-
-supreme; nidhanam--basis; tvam--You are; avyayah--inexhaustible;
sasvata-dharma-gopta--maintainer of the eternal religion; sanatanah--
eternal; tvam--You; purusah--Supreme Personality; matah me--is my
opinion.
TRANSLATION
You are the supreme primal objective; You are the best in all the
universes; You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest; You are the
maintainer of religion, the eternal Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 19
anadi-madhyantam ananta-viryam
ananta-bahum sasi-surya-netram
pasyami tvam dipta-hutasa-vaktram
sva-tejasa visvam idam tapantam
SYNONYMS
anadi--without beginning; madhya--without middle; antam--without end;
ananta--unlimited; viryam--glorious; ananta--unlimited; bahum--arms;
sasi--moon; surya--sun; netram--eyes; pasyami--I see; tvam--You; dipta-
-blazing; hutasa-vaktram--fire coming out of Your mouth; sva-tejasa--by
Your; visvam--this universe; idam--this; tapantam--heating.
TRANSLATION
You are the origin without beginning, middle or end. You have
numberless arms, and the sun and moon are among Your great unlimited
eyes. By Your own radiance You are heating this entire universe.
PURPORT
There is no limit to the extent of the six opulences of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Here and in many other places there is
repetition, but according to the scriptures, repetition of the glories
of Krsna is not a literary weakness. It is said that at a time of
bewilderment or wonder or of great ecstasy, statements are repeated
over and over. That is not a flaw.
TEXT 20
dyav a-prthivyor idam antaram hi
vyaptam tvayaikena disas ca sarvah
drstvadbhutam rupam ugram tavedam
loka-trayam pravyathitam mahatman
SYNONYMS
dyau--in outer space; a-prthivyoh--of the earth; idam--this; antaram--
in between; hi--certainly; vyaptam--pervaded; tvaya--by You; ekena--by
one; disah--directions; ca--and; sarvah--all; drstva--by seeing;
adbhutam--wonderful; rupam--form; ugram--terrible; tava--Your; idam--
this; loka--planetary system; trayam--three; pravyathitam--perturbed;
maha-atman--O great one.
TRANSLATION
Although You are one, You are spread throughout the sky and the planets
and all space between. O great one, as I behold this terrible form, I
see that all the planetary systems are perplexed.
PURPORT
Dyav a-prthivyoh (the space between heaven and earth) and loka-trayam
(the three worlds) are significant words in this verse because it
appears that not only Arjuna saw this universal form of the Lord, but
others in other planetary systems also saw it. The vision was not a
dream. All whom were spiritually awake with the divine vision saw it.
TEXT 21
ami hi tvam sura-sangha visanti
kecid bhitah pranjalayo grnanti
svastity uktva maharsi-siddha-sanghah
stuvanti tvam stutibhih puskalabhih
SYNONYMS
ami--all those; hi--certainly; tvam--unto You; sura-sanghah--groups of
demigods; visanti--entering; kecit--some of them; bhitah--out of fear;
pranjalayah--with folded hands; grnanti--offering prayers unto; svasti-
-all peace; iti--thus; uktva--speaking like that; maha-rsi--great
sages; siddha-sanghah--perfect sages; stuvanti--singing hymns; tvam--
unto You; stutibhih--with prayers; puskalabhih--Vedic hymns.
TRANSLATION
All the demigods are surrendering and entering into You. They are very
much afraid, and with folded hands they are singing the Vedic hymns.
PURPORT
The demigods in all the planetary systems feared the terrific
manifestation of the universal form and its glowing effulgence and so
prayed for protection.
TEXT 22
rudraditya vasavo ye ca sadhya
visve 'svinau marutas cosmapas ca
gandharva-yaksasura-siddha-sangha
viksante tvam vismitas caiva sarve
SYNONYMS
rudra--manifestations of Lord Siva; adityah--the Adityas; vasavah--the
Vasus; ye--all those; ca--and; sadhyah--the Sadhyas; visve--the
Visvedevas; asvinau--the Asvini-kumaras; marutah--the Maruts; ca--and;
usma-pah--the forefathers; ca--and; gandharva--of the Gandharvas;
yaksa--the Yaksas; asura-siddha--the demons and the perfected demigods;
sanghah--assemblies; viksante--are seeing; tvam--You; vismitah--in
wonder; ca--also; eva--certainly; sarve--all.
TRANSLATION
The different manifestations of Lord Siva, the Adityas, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Visvedevas, the two Asvis, the Maruts, the forefathers and
the Gandharvas, the Yaksas, Asuras, and all perfected demigods are
beholding You in wonder.
TEXT 23
rupam mahat te bahu-vaktra-netram
maha-baho bahu-bahuru-padam
bahudaram bahu-damstra-karalam
drstva lokah pravyathitas tathaham
SYNONYMS
rupam--form; mahat--very great; te--of You; bahu--many; vaktra--faces;
netram--eyes; maha-baho--O mighty-armed one; bahu--many; bahu--arms;
uru--thighs; padam--legs; bahu-udaram--many bellies; bahu-damstra--many
teeth; karalam--horrible; drstva--seeing; lokah--all the planets;
pravyathitah--perturbed; tatha--similarly; aham--I.
TRANSLATION
O mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed
at seeing Your many faces, eyes, arms, bellies and legs and Your
terrible teeth, and as they are disturbed, so am I.
TEXT 24
nabhah-sprsam diptam aneka-varnam
vyattananam dipta-visala-netram
drstva hi tvam pravyathitantar-atma
dhrtim na vindami samam ca visno
SYNONYMS
nabhah-sprsam--touching the sky; diptam--glowing; aneka--many; varnam--
color; vyatta--open; ananam--mouth; dipta--glowing; visala--very great;
netram--eyes; drstva--by seeing; hi--certainly; tvam--You; pravyathita-
-perturbed; antah--within; atma--soul; dhrtim--steadiness; na--no;
vindami--and have; samam--mental tranquillity; ca--also; visno--O Lord
Visnu.
TRANSLATION
O all-pervading Visnu, I can no longer maintain my equilibrium. Seeing
Your radiant colors fill the skies and beholding Your eyes and mouths,
I am afraid.
TEXT 25
damstra-karalani ca te mukhani
drstvaiva kalanala-sannibhani
diso na jane na labhe ca sarma
prasida devesa jagan-nivasa
SYNONYMS
damstra--teeth; karalani--like that; ca--also; te--Your; mukhani--
faces; drstva--seeing; eva--thus; kala-anala--the fire of death;
sannibhani--as if blazing; disah--directions; na jane--do not know; na
labhe--nor obtain; ca sarma--and grace; prasida--be pleased; deva-isa--
O Lord of all lords; jagat-nivasa--refuge of the worlds.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I
cannot keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces and
awful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered.
TEXTS 26-27
ami ca tvam dhrtarastrasya putrah
sarve sahaivavani-pala-sanghaih
bhismo dronah suta-putras tathasau
sahasmadiyair api yodha-mukhyaih
vaktrani te tvaramana visanti
damstra-karalani bhayanakani
kecid vilagna dasanantaresu
sandrsyante curnitair uttamangaih
SYNONYMS
ami--all those; ca--also; tvam--You; dhrtarastrasya--of Dhrtarastra;
putrah--sons; sarve--all; saha eva--along with; avani-pala--warrior
kings; sanghaih--the groups; bhismah--Bhismadeva; dronah--Dronacarya;
suta-putrah--Karna; tatha--also; asau--that; saha--with; asmadiyaih--
our; api--also; yodha-mukhyaih--chief among the warriors; vaktrani--
mouths; te--Your; tvaramanah--fearful; visanti--entering; damstra--
teeth; karalani--terrible; bhayanakani--very fearful; kecit--some of
them; vilagnah--being attacked; dasana-antaresu--between the teeth;
sandrsyante--being seen; curnitaih--smashed; uttama-angaih--by the
head.
TRANSLATION
All the sons of Dhrtarastra along with their allied kings, and Bhisma,
Drona and Karna, and all our soldiers are rushing into Your mouths,
their heads smashed by Your fearful teeth. I see that some are being
crushed between Your teeth as well.
PURPORT
In a previous verse the Lord promised to show Arjuna things he would be
very interested in seeing. Now Arjuna sees that the leaders of the
opposite party (Bhisma, Drona, Karna and all the sons of Dhrtarastra)
and their soldiers and Arjuna's own soldiers are all being annihilated.
This is an indication that Arjuna will emerge victorious in battle,
despite heavy losses on both sides. It is also mentioned here that
Bhisma, who is supposed to be unconquerable, will also be smashed. So
also Karna. Not only will the great warriors of the other party like
Bhisma be smashed, but some of the great warriors of Arjuna's side
also.
TEXT 28
yatha nadinam bahavo 'mbu-vegah
samudram evabhimukha dravanti
tatha tavami nara-loka-vira
visanti vaktrany abhivijvalanti
SYNONYMS
yatha--as; nadinam--of the rivers; bahavah--many; ambu-vegah--waves of
the waters; samudram--ocean; eva--certainly; abhimukhah--towards;
dravanti--gliding; tatha--similarly; tava--Your; ami--all those; nara-
loka-virah--the kings of human society; visanti--entering; vaktrani--
into the mouths; abhivijvalanti--blazing.
TRANSLATION
As the rivers flow into the sea, so all these great warriors enter Your
blazing mouths and perish.
TEXT 29
yatha pradiptam jvalanam patanga
visanti nasaya samrddha-vegah
tathaiva nasaya visanti lokas
tavapi vaktrani samrddha-vegah
SYNONYMS
yatha--as; pradiptam--blazing; jvalanam--fire; patangah--moths;
visanti--enters; nasaya--destruction; samrddha--full; vegah--speed;
tatha eva--similarly; nasaya--for destruction; visanti--entering;
lokah--all people; tava--unto You; api--also; vaktrani--in the mouths;
samrddha-vegah--with full speed.
TRANSLATION
I see all people rushing with full speed into Your mouths as moths dash
into a blazing fire.
TEXT 30
lelihyase grasamanah samantal
lokan samagran vadanair jvaladbhih
tejobhir apurya jagat samagram
bhasas tavograh pratapanti visno
SYNONYMS
lelihyase--licking; 
grasamanah--devouring; 
samantat--from 
all
directions; lokan--people; samagran--completely; vadanaih--by the
mouth; jvaladbhih--with blazing; tejobhih--by effulgence; apurya--
covering; jagat--the universe; samagram--all; bhasah--illuminating;
tava--Your; ugrah--terrible; pratapanti--scorching; visno--O all-
pervading Lord.
TRANSLATION
O Visnu, I see You devouring all people in Your flaming mouths and
covering the universe with Your immeasurable rays. Scorching the
worlds, You are manifest.
TEXT 31
akhyahi me ko bhavan ugra-rupo
namo 'stu te deva-vara prasida
vijnatum icchami bhavantam adyam
na hi prajanami tava pravrttim
SYNONYMS
akhyahi--please explain; me--unto me; kah--who; bhavan--You; ugra-
rupah--fierce form; namah astu--obeisances; te--unto You; deva-vara--
the great one amongst the demigods; prasida--be gracious; vijnatum--
just to know; icchami--I wish; bhavantam--You; adyam--the original; na-
-never; hi--certainly; prajanami--do I know; tava--Your; pravrttim--
mission.
TRANSLATION
O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer
my obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. I do not know what
Your mission is, and I desire to hear of it.
TEXT 32
sri-bhagavan uvaca
kalo 'smi loka-ksaya-krt pravrddho
lokan samahartum iha pravrttah
rte 'pi tvam na bhavisyanti sarve
ye 'vasthitah pratyanikesu yodhah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Personality of Godhead said; kalah--time; asmi-
-I am; loka--the worlds; ksaya-krt--destroyer; pravrddhah--to engage;
lokan--all people; samahartum--to destroy; iha--in this world;
pravrttah--to engage; rte api--without even; tvam--you; na--never;
bhavisyanti--will be; sarve--all; ye--who; avasthitah--situated; prati-
anikesu--on the opposite side; yodhah--the soldiers.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: Time I am, destroyer of the worlds, and I have
come to engage all people. With the exception of you [the Pandavas],
all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.
PURPORT
Although Arjuna knew that Krsna was his friend and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, he was nonetheless puzzled by the various forms
exhibited by Krsna. Therefore he asked further about the actual mission
of this devastating force. It is written in the Vedas that the Supreme
Truth destroys everything, even Brahma. As stated in the Katha Upanisad
(1.2.25),
yasya brahma ca ksatram ca
ubhe bhavata odanah
mrtyur yasyopasecanam
ka ittha veda yatra sah
Eventually all the brahmanas, ksatriyas and everyone else are devoured
by the Supreme. This form of the Supreme Lord is the all-devouring
giant, and here Krsna presents Himself in that form of all-devouring
time. Except for a few Pandavas, everyone who was present in that
battlefield would be devoured by Him.
TEXT 33
tasmat tvam uttistha yaso labhasva
jitva satrun bhunksva rajyam samrddham
mayaivaite nihatah purvam eva
nimitta-matram bhava savya-sacin
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; tvam--you; uttistha--get up; yasah--fame; labhasva--
gain; jitva--conquering; satrun--enemies; bhunksva--enjoy; rajyam--
kingdom; samrddham--flourishing; maya--by Me; eva--certainly; ete--all
these; nihatah--already killed; purvam eva--by previous arrangement;
nimitta-matram--just 
the 
cause; 
bhava--become; 
savya-sacin--O
Savyasaci.
TRANSLATION
Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies
you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by
My arrangement, and you, O Savyasaci, can be but an instrument in the
fight.
PURPORT
Savya-sacin refers to one who can shoot arrows very expertly in the
field; thus Arjuna is addressed as an expert warrior capable of
delivering arrows to kill his enemies. "Just become an instrument":
nimitta-matram. This word is also very significant. The whole world is
moving according to the plan of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Foolish persons who do not have sufficient knowledge think that nature
is moving without a plan and all manifestations are but accidental
formations. There are many so-called scientists who suggest that
perhaps it was like this, or maybe like that, but there is no question
of "perhaps" and "maybe." There is a specific plan being carried out in
this material world. What is this plan? This cosmic manifestation is a
chance for the conditioned souls to go back to Godhead, back to home.
As long as they have the domineering mentality which makes them try to
lord it over material nature, they are conditioned. But anyone who can
understand the plan of the Supreme Lord and cultivate Krsna
consciousness is most intelligent. The creation and destruction of the
cosmic manifestation are under the superior guidance of God. Thus the
Battle of Kuruksetra was fought according to the plan of God. Arjuna
was refusing to fight, but he was told that he should fight and at the
same time desire the Supreme Lord. Then he would be happy. If one is in
full Krsna consciousness and if his life is devoted to His
transcendental service, he is perfect.
TEXT 34
dronam ca bhismam ca jayadratham ca
karnam tathanyan api yodha-viran
maya hatams tvam jahi ma vyathistha
yudhyasva jetasi rane sapatnan
SYNONYMS
dronam ca--also Drona; bhismam ca--also Bhisma; jayadratham ca--also
Jayadratha; karnam--also Karna; tatha--also; anyan--others; api--
certainly; yodha-viran--great warriors; maya--by Me; hatan--already
killed; tvam--you; jahi--become victorious; ma--never; vyathisthah--be
disturbed; yudhyasva--just fight; jeta asi--just conquer; rane--in the
fight; sapatnan--enemies.
TRANSLATION
THe Blessed Lord said: All the great warriors--Drona, Bhisma,
Jayadratha, Karna--are already destroyed. Simply fight, and you will
vanquish your enemies.
PURPORT
Every plan is made by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but He is so
kind and merciful to His devotees that He wants to give the credit to
His devotees who carry out His plan according to His desire. Life
should therefore move in such a way that everyone acts in Krsna
consciousness and understands the Supreme Personality of Godhead
through the medium of a spiritual master. The plans of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead are understood by His mercy, and the plans of
the devotees are as good as His plans. One should follow such plans and
be victorious in the struggle for existence.
TEXT 35
sanjaya uvaca
etac chrutva vacanam kesavasya
krtanjalir vepamanah kiriti
namaskrtva bhuya evaha krsnam
sa-gadgadam bhita-bhitah pranamya
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; etat--thus; srutva--hearing; vacanam--
speech; kesavasya--of Krsna; krta-anjalih--with folded hands;
vepamanah--trembling; kiriti--Arjuna; namaskrtva--offering obeisances;
bhuyah--again; eva--also; aha krsnam--said unto Krsna; sa-gadgadam--
faltering; bhita-bhitah--fearful; pranamya--offering obeisances.
TRANSLATION
Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: O King, after hearing these words from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna trembled, fearfully offered
obeisances with folded hands and began, falteringly, to speak as
follows:
PURPORT
As we have already explained, because of the situation created by the
universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Arjuna became
bewildered in wonder; thus he began to offer his respectful obeisances
to Krsna again and again, and with faltering voice he began to pray,
not as a friend, but as a devotee in wonder.
TEXT 36
arjuna uvaca
sthane hrsikesa tava prakirtya
jagat prahrsyaty anurajyate ca
raksamsi bhitani diso dravanti
sarve namasyanti ca siddha-sanghah
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; sthane--rightly; hrsika-isa--O master of
all senses; tava--Your; prakirtya--glories; jagat--the entire world;
prahrsyati--rejoicing; 
anurajyate--becoming 
attached; 
ca--and;
raksamsi--the demons; bhitani--out of fear; disah--directions;
dravanti--fleeing; sarve--all; namasyanti--offering respect; ca--also;
siddha-sanghah--the perfect human beings.
TRANSLATION
O Hrsikesa, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus
everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer
You their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee here
and there. All this is rightly done.
PURPORT
Arjuna, after hearing from Krsna about the outcome of the Battle of
Kuruksetra, became an enlightened devotee of the Supreme Lord. He
admitted that everything done by Krsna is quite fit. Arjuna confirmed
that Krsna is the maintainer and the object of worship for the devotees
and the destroyer of the undesirables. His actions are equally good for
all. Arjuna understood herein that when the Battle of Kuruksetra was
being concluded, in outer space there were present many demigods,
siddhas, and the intelligentsia of the higher planets, and they were
observing the fight because Krsna was present there. When Arjuna saw
the universal form of the Lord, the demigods took pleasure in it, but
others, who were demons and atheists, could not stand it when the Lord
was praised. Out of their natural fear of the devastating form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they fled. Krsna's treatment of the
devotees and the atheists is praised by Arjuna. In all cases a devotee
glorifies the Lord because he knows that whatever He does is good for
all.
TEXT 37
kasmac ca te na nameran mahatman
gariyase brahmano 'py adi-kartre
ananta devesa jagan-nivasa
tvam aksaram sad-asat tat param yat
SYNONYMS
kasmat--why; ca--also; te--unto You; na--not; nameran--offer proper
obeisances; maha-atman--O great one; gariyase--You are better than;
brahmanah--Brahma; api--although; adi-kartre--the supreme creator;
ananta--unlimited; deva-isa--God of the gods; jagat-nivasa--O refuge of
the universe; tvam--You are; aksaram--imperishable; sat-asat--cause and
effect; tat param--transcendental; yat--because.
TRANSLATION
O great one, who stands above even Brahma, You are the original master.
Why should they not offer their homage up to You, O limitless one? O
refuge of the universe, You are the invincible source, the cause of all
causes, transcendental to this material manifestation.
PURPORT
By this offering of obeisances, Arjuna indicates that Krsna is
worshipable by everyone. He is all-pervading, and He is the Soul of
every soul. Arjuna is addressing Krsna as mahatma, which means that He
is most magnanimous and unlimited. Ananta indicates that there is
nothing which is not covered by the influence and energy of the Supreme
Lord, and devesa means that He is the controller of all demigods and is
above them all. He is the center of the whole universe. Arjuna also
thought that it was fitting that all the perfect living entities and
all powerful demigods offer their respectful obeisances unto Him
because no one is greater than Him. He especially mentions that Krsna
is greater than Brahma because Brahma is created by Him. Brahma is born
out of the lotus stem grown from the navel abdomen of Garbhodakasayi
Visnu, who is Krsna's plenary expansion; therefore Brahma and Lord
Siva, who is born of Brahma, and all other demigods must offer their
respectful obeisances. Thus the Lord is respected by Lord Siva and
Brahma and similar other demigods. The word aksaram is very significant
because this material creation is subject to destruction but the Lord
is above this material creation. He is the cause of all causes, and
being so, He is superior to all the conditioned souls within this
material nature as well as the material cosmic manifestation itself. He
is therefore the all-great Supreme.
TEXT 38
tvam adi-devah purusah puranas
tvam asya visvasya param nidhanam
vettasi vedyam ca param ca dhama
tvaya tatam visvam ananta-rupa
SYNONYMS
tvam--You; adi-devah--the original Supreme God; purusah--personality;
puranah--old; tvam--You; asya--this; visvasya--universe; param--
transcendental; nidhanam--refuge; vetta--knower; asi--You are; vedyam
ca--and the knowable; param ca--and transcendental; dhama--refuge;
tvaya--by You; tatam--pervaded; visvam--universe; ananta-rupa--
unlimited form.
TRANSLATION
You are the original Personality, the Godhead. You are the only
sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world. You know everything, and You
are all that is knowable. You are above the material modes O limitless
form! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded by You!
PURPORT
Everything is resting on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore
He is the ultimate rest. Nidhanam means that everything, even the
Brahman effulgence, rests on the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna.
He is the knower of everything that is happening in this world, and if
knowledge has any end, He is the end of all knowledge; therefore He is
the known and the knowable. He is the object of knowledge because He is
all-pervading. Because He is the cause in the spiritual world, He is
transcendental. He is also the chief personality in the transcendental
world.
TEXT 39
vayur yamo 'gnir varunah sasankah
prajapatis tvam prapitamahas ca
namo namas te 'stu sahasra-krtvah
punas ca bhuyo 'pi namo namas te
SYNONYMS
vayuh--air; yamah--controller; agnih--fire; varunah--water; sasa-ankah-
-moon; prajapatih--Brahma; tvam--You; prapitamahah--grandfather; ca--
also; namah--offering respects; namah te--again my respects unto You;
astu--are being; sahasra-krtvah--a thousand times; punah ca--and again;
bhuyah--again; api--also; namah--offer my respects; namah te--offering
my respects unto You.
TRANSLATION
You are air, fire, water and You are the moon! You are the supreme
controller and the grandfather. Thus I offer my respectful obeisances
unto You a thousand times, and again and yet again!
PURPORT
The Lord is addressed here as air because the air is the most important
representation of all the demigods, being all-pervasive. Arjuna also
addresses Krsna as the grandfather because He is the father of Brahma,
the first living creature in the universe.
TEXT 40
namah purastad atha prsthatas te
namo 'stu te sarvata eva sarva
ananta-viryamita-vikramas tvam
sarvam samapnosi tato 'si sarvah
SYNONYMS
namah--offering obeisances; purastat--from the front; atha--also;
prsthatah--from behind; te--You; namah astu--offer my respects; te--
unto You; sarvatah--from all sides; eva sarva--because You are
everything; ananta-virya--unlimited potency; amita-vikramah--unlimited
force; tvam--You; sarvam--everything; samapnosi--cover; tatah asi--
therefore You are; sarvah--everything.
TRANSLATION
Obeisances from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded
power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading,
and thus You are everything!
PURPORT
Out of loving ecstasy for Krsna, his friend, Arjuna is offering his
respects from all sides. He is accepting that He is the master of all
potencies and all prowess and far superior to all the great warriors
assembled on the battlefield. It is said in the Visnu Purana (1.9.69):
yo 'yam tavagato deva
samipam devata-ganah
sa tvam eva jagat-srasta
yatah sarva-gato bhavan
"Whoever comes before You, be he a demigod, is created by You, O
Supreme Personality of Godhead."
TEXTS 41-42
sakheti matva prasabham yad uktam
he krsna he yadava he sakheti
ajanata mahimanam tavedam
maya pramadat pranayena vapi
yac cavahasartham asat-krto 'si
vihara-sayyasana-bhojanesu
eko 'tha vapy acyuta tat-samaksam
tat ksamaye tvam aham aprameyam
SYNONYMS
sakha--friend; iti--thus; matva--thinking; prasabham--temporary; yat--
whatever; uktam--said; he krsna--O Krsna; he yadava--O Yadava; he sakhe
iti--O my dear friend; ajanata--without knowing; mahimanam--glories;
tava--Your; idam--this; maya--by me; pramadat--out of foolishness;
pranayena--out of love; va api--either; yat--whatever; ca--also;
avahasa-artham--for joking; asat-krtah--dishonor; asi--have been done;
vihara--in relaxation; sayya--in joking; asana--in a resting place;
bhojanesu--or while eating together; ekah--alone; atha va--or; api--
others; acyuta--O infallible one; tat-samaksam--as Your competitor;
tat--all those; ksamaye--excuse; tvam--from You; aham--I; aprameyam--
immeasurable.
TRANSLATION
I have in the past addressed You as "O Krsna," "O Yadava," "O my
friend," without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I may
have done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times while
relaxing or while lying on the same bed or eating together, sometimes
alone and sometimes in front of many friends. Please excuse me for all
my offenses.
PURPORT
Although Krsna is manifested before Arjuna in His universal form,
Arjuna remembers his friendly relationship with Krsna and is therefore
asking pardon and requesting Him to excuse him for the many informal
gestures which arise out of friendship. He is admitting that formerly
he did not know that Krsna could assume such a universal form, although
Krsna explained it as his intimate friend. Arjuna did not know how many
times he may have dishonored Krsna by addressing Him "O my friend," "O
Krsna," "O Yadava," etc., without acknowledging His opulence. But Krsna
is so kind and merciful that in spite of such opulence He played with
Arjuna as a friend. Such is the transcendental loving reciprocation
between the devotee and the Lord. The relationship between the living
entity and Krsna is fixed eternally; it cannot be forgotten, as we can
see from the behavior of Arjuna. Although Arjuna has seen the opulence
in the universal form, he cannot forget his friendly relationship with
Krsna.
TEXT 43
pitasi lokasya caracarasya
tvam asya pujyas ca gurur gariyan
na tvat-samo 'sty abhyadhikah kuto 'nyo
loka-traye 'py apratima-prabhava
SYNONYMS
pita--father; asi--You are; lokasya--of all the world; cara--moving;
acarasya--nonmoving; tvam--You are; asya--of this; pujyah--worshipable;
ca--also; guruh--master; gariyan--glorious; na--never; tvat-samah--
equal to You; asti--there is; abhyadhikah--greater; kutah--how is it
possible; anyah--other; loka-traye--in three planetary systems; api--
also; apratima--immeasurable; prabhava--power.
TRANSLATION
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, the
worshipable chief, the spiritual master. No one is equal to You, nor
can anyone be one with You. Within the three worlds, You are
immeasurable.
PURPORT
The Lord Krsna is worshipable as a father is worshipable for his son.
He is the spiritual master because He originally gave the Vedic
instructions to Brahma, and presently He is also instructing Bhagavad-
gita to Arjuna; therefore He is the original spiritual master, and any
bona fide spiritual master at the present moment must be a descendant
in the line of disciplic succession stemming from Krsna. Without being
a representative of Krsna, one cannot become a teacher or spiritual
master of transcendental subject matter.
The Lord is being paid obeisances in all respects. He is of
immeasurable greatness. No one can be greater than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, because no one is equal to or higher
than Krsna within any manifestation, spiritual or material. Everyone is
below Him. No one can excel Him.
The Supreme Lord, Krsna, has senses and a body like the ordinary man,
but for Him there is no difference between His senses, body, mind and
Himself. Foolish persons who do not know Him perfectly say that Krsna
is different from His soul, mind, heart and everything else. Krsna is
absolute; therefore His activities and potencies are supreme. It is
also stated that He does not have senses like ours. He can perform all
sensual activities; therefore His senses are neither imperfect nor
limited. No one can be greater than Him, no one can be equal to Him,
and everyone is lower than Him.
Whoever knows His transcendental body, activities and perfection, after
quitting his body, returns to Him and doesn't come back again to this
miserable world. Therefore one should know that Krsna's activities are
different from others. The best policy is to follow the principles of
Krsna; that will make one perfect. It is also stated that there is no
one who is master of Krsna; everyone is His servant. The Caitanya-
caritamrta (Adi 5.142) confirms, ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya:
only Krsna is God, and everyone else is His servant. Everyone is
complying with His order. There is no one who can deny His order.
Everyone is acting according to His direction, being under His
superintendence. As stated in the Brahma-samhita, He is the cause of
all causes.
TEXT 44
tasmat pranamya pranidhaya kayam
prasadaye tvam aham isam idyam
piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuh
priyah priyayarhasi deva sodhum
SYNONYMS
tasmat--therefore; pranamya--after offering obeisances; pranidhaya--
laying down; kayam--body; prasadaye--to beg mercy; tvam--unto You;
aham--I; isam--unto the Supreme Lord; idyam--who is worshipable; pita
iva--like a father; putrasya--of a son; sakha iva--like a friend;
sakhyuh--of a friend; priyah--lover; priyayah--of the dearmost; arhasi-
-You should; deva--my Lord; sodhum--tolerate.
TRANSLATION
You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I
fall down to offer You my respects and ask Your mercy. Please tolerate
the wrongs that I may have done to You and bear with me as a father
with his son, or a friend with his friend, or a lover with his beloved.
PURPORT
Krsna's devotees relate to Krsna in various relationships; one might
treat Krsna as a son, one might treat Krsna as a husband, as a friend,
as a master, etc. Krsna and Arjuna are related in friendship. As the
father tolerates, or the husband or master tolerates, so Krsna
tolerates.
TEXT 45
adrsta-purvam hrsito 'smi drstva
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano me
tad eva me darsaya deva rupam
prasida devesa jagan-nivasa
SYNONYMS
adrsta-purvam--never seen before; hrsitah--gladdened; asmi--I am;
drstva--by seeing; bhayena--out of fear; ca--also; pravyathitam--
perturbed; manah--mind; me--my; tat--therefore; eva--certainly; me--
unto me; darsaya--show; deva--O Lord; rupam--the form; prasida--just be
gracious; deva-isa--O Lord of lords; jagat-nivasa--the refuge of the
universe.
TRANSLATION
After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am
gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear.
Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form
as the Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of the
universe.
PURPORT
Arjuna is always in confidence with Krsna because he is a very dear
friend, and as a dear friend is gladdened by his friend's opulence,
Arjuna is very joyful to see that his friend, Krsna, is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and can show such a wonderful universal form.
But at the same time, after seeing that universal form, he is afraid
that he has committed so many offenses to Krsna out of his unalloyed
friendship. Thus his mind is disturbed out of fear, although he had no
reason to fear. Arjuna therefore is asking Krsna to show His Narayana
form because He can assume any form. This universal form is material
and temporary, as the material world is temporary. But in the Vaikuntha
planets He has His transcendental form with four hands as Narayana.
There are innumerable planets in the spiritual sky, and in each of them
Krsna is present by His plenary manifestations of different names. Thus
Arjuna desired to see one of the forms manifest in the Vaikuntha
planets. Of course in each Vaikuntha planet the form of Narayana is
four-handed, and the four hands hold different arrangements of symbols-
-the conchshell, mace, lotus and disc. According to the different hands
these four things are held in, the Narayanas are named. All of these
forms are one and the same to Krsna; therefore Arjuna requests to see
His four-handed feature.
TEXT 46
kiritinam gadinam cakra-hastam
icchami tvam drastum aham tathaiva
tenaiva rupena catur-bhujena
sahasra-baho bhava visva-murte
SYNONYMS
kiritinam--with helmet; gadinam--with club; cakra-hastam--disc in hand;
icchami--I wish; tvam--You; drastum--to see; aham--I; tatha eva--in
that position; tena eva--by that; rupena--with form; catuh-bhujena--
four-handed; sahasra-baho--O thousand-handed one; bhava--just become;
visva-murte--O universal form.
TRANSLATION
O universal Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with
helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Your
hands. I long to see You in that form.
PURPORT
In the Brahma-samhita (5.39) it is stated, ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena
tisthan: the Lord is eternally situated in hundreds and thousands of
forms, and the main forms are those like Rama, Nrsimha, Narayana, etc.
There are innumerable forms. But Arjuna knew that Krsna is the original
Personality of Godhead assuming His temporary universal form. He is now
asking to see the form of Narayana, a spiritual form. This verse
establishes without any doubt the statement of the Srimad-Bhagavatam
that Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead and all other
features originate from Him. He is not different from His plenary
expansions, and He is God in any of His innumerable forms. In all of
these forms He is fresh like a young man. That is the constant feature
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who knows Krsna at once
becomes free from all contamination of the material world.
TEXT 47
sri-bhagavan uvaca
maya prasannena tavarjunedam
rupam param darsitam atma-yogat
tejo-mayam visvam anantam adyam
yan me tvad anyena na drsta-purvam
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; maya--by
Me; prasannena--happily; tava--unto you; arjuna--O Arjuna; idam--this;
rupam--form; param--transcendental; darsitam--shown; atma-yogat--by My
internal potency; tejah-mayam--full of effulgence; visvam--the entire
universe; anantam--unlimited; adyam--original; yat me--that which is
Mine; tvat anyena--besides you; na drsta-purvam--no one has previously
seen.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, happily do I show you this
universal form within the material world by My internal potency. No one
before you has ever seen this unlimited and glaringly effulgent form.
PURPORT
Arjuna wanted to see the universal form of the Supreme Lord, so out of
His mercy upon His devotee Arjuna, Lord Krsna showed him His universal
form full of effulgence and opulence. This form was glaring like the
sun, and its many faces were rapidly changing. Krsna showed this form
just to satisfy the desire of His friend Arjuna. This form was
manifested by Krsna through His internal potency, which is
inconceivable by human speculation. No one had seen this universal form
of the Lord before Arjuna, but because the form was shown to Arjuna,
other devotees in the heavenly planets and in other planets in outer
space could also see it. They did not seen it before, but because of
Arjuna they were able to see it. In other words, all the disciplic
devotees of the Lord could see the universal form which was shown to
Arjuna by the mercy of Krsna. Someone commented that this form was
shown to Duryodhana also when Krsna went to Duryodhana to negotiate for
peace. Unfortunately, Duryodhana did not accept the peace offer, but at
that time Krsna manifested some of His universal forms. But those forms
are different from this one shown to Arjuna. It is clearly said that no
one has ever seen this form before.
TEXT 48
na veda-yajnadhyayanair na danair
na ca kriyabhir na tapobhir ugraih
evam-rupah sakya aham nr-loke
drastum tvad anyena kuru-pravira
SYNONYMS
na--never; veda--Vedic study; yajna--sacrifice; adhyayanaih--study; na
danaih--by charity; na--never; ca--also; kriyabhih--by pious
activities; na tapobhih--by serious penances; ugraih--severe; evam--
thus; rupah--form; sakyah--can be seen; aham--I; nr-loke--in this
material world; drastum--to see; tvat--you; anyena--by another; kuru-
pravira--O best among the Kuru warriors.
TRANSLATION
O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this
universal form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor by
performing sacrifices, nor by charities or similar activities can this
form be seen. Only you have seen this.
PURPORT
The divine vision in this connection should be clearly understood. Who
can have divine vision? Divine means godly. Unless one attains the
status of divinity as a demigod, he cannot have divine vision. And what
is a demigod? It is stated in the Vedic scriptures that those who are
devotees of Lord Visnu are demigods (visnu-bhaktah smrta devah). Those
who are atheistic, i.e., who do not believe in Visnu, or who only
recognize the impersonal part of Krsna as the Supreme, cannot have the
divine vision. It is not possible to decry Krsna and at the same time
have the divine vision. One cannot have the divine vision without
becoming divine. In other words, those who have divine vision can also
see like Arjuna.
The Bhagavad-gita gives the description of the universal form, and this
description was unknown to everyone before Arjuna. Now one can have
some idea of the visva-rupa after this incident; those who are actually
divine can see the universal form of the Lord. But one cannot be divine
without being a pure devotee of Krsna. The devotees, however, who are
actually in the divine nature and who have divine vision, are not very
much interested to see the universal form of the Lord. As described in
the previous verse, Arjuna desired to see the four-handed form of Lord
Krsna as Visnu, and he was actually afraid of the universal form.
In this verse there are some significant words, like veda-
yajnadhyayanaih, which refers to studying Vedic literature and the
subject matter of sacrificial regulations. Veda refers to all kinds of
Vedic literature, namely the four Vedas (Rg, Yajur, Sama and Atharva)
and the eighteen Puranas, the Upanisads and the Vedanta-sutra. One can
study these at home or anywhere else. Similarly, there are sutras--
Kalpa-sutras and Mimamsa-sutras--for studying the method of sacrifice.
Danaih refers to charity which is offered to a suitable party, such as
those who are engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord-
-the brahmanas and the Vaisnavas. Similarly, "pious activities" refers
to the agni-hotra and the prescribed duties of the different castes.
And the voluntary acceptance of some bodily pains is called tapasya. So
one can perform all these, can accept bodily penances, give charity,
study the Vedas, etc., but unless he is a devotee like Arjuna, it is
not possible to see that universal form. Those who are impersonalists
are also imagining that they are seeing the universal form of the Lord,
but from Bhagavad-gita we understand that the impersonalists are not
devotees. Therefore they are unable to see the universal form of the
Lord.
There are many persons who create incarnations. They falsely claim an
ordinary human being to be an incarnation, but all this is foolishness.
We should follow the principles of Bhagavad-gita, otherwise there is no
possibility of attaining perfect spiritual knowledge. Although
Bhagavad-gita is considered the preliminary study of the science of
God, still it is so perfect that one can distinguish what is what. The
followers of a pseudo incarnation may say that they have also seen the
transcendental incarnation of God, the universal form, but that is not
acceptable because it is clearly stated here that unless one becomes a
devotee of Krsna, one cannot see the universal form of God. So one
first of all has to become a pure devotee of Krsna; then he can claim
that he can show the universal form of what he has seen. A devotee of
Krsna cannot accept false incarnations or followers of false
incarnations.
TEXT 49
ma te vyatha ma ca vimudha-bhavo
drstva rupam ghoram idrn mamedam
vyapeta-bhih prita-manah punas tvam
tad eva me rupam idam prapasya
SYNONYMS
ma--let it not be; te--unto you; vyatha--trouble; ma--let it not be;
ca--also; vimudha-bhavah--bewilderment; drstva--by seeing; rupam--form;
ghoram--horrible; idrk--like this; mama--My; idam--as it is; vyapeta-
bhih--just become free from all fear; prita-manah--be pleased in mind;
punah--again; tvam--you; tat--that; eva--thus; me--My; rupam--form;
idam--this; prapasya--just see.
TRANSLATION
Your mind has been perturbed upon seeing this horrible feature of Mine.
Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free from all disturbance. With
a peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.
PURPORT
In the beginning of Bhagavad-gita Arjuna was worried about killing
Bhisma and Drona, his worshipful grandfather and master. But Krsna said
that he need not be afraid of killing his grandfather. When they tried
to disrobe Draupadi in the assembly, Bhisma and Drona were silent, and
for such negligence of duty they should be killed. Krsna showed His
universal form to Arjuna just to show him that these people were
already killed for their unlawful action. That scene was shown to
Arjuna because devotees are always peaceful, and they cannot perform
such horrible actions. The purpose of the revelation of the universal
form was shown; now Arjuna wanted to see the four-armed form, and Krsna
showed him. A devotee is not much interested in the universal form, for
it does not enable one to reciprocate loving feelings. A devotee wants
to offer his respectful worshiping feelings; thus he wants to see the
two-handed or four-handed Krsna form so he can reciprocate in loving
service with the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
TEXT 50
sanjaya uvaca
ity arjunam vasudevas tathoktva
svakam rupam darsayam asa bhuyah
asvasayam asa ca bhitam enam
bhutva punah saumya-vapur mahatma
SYNONYMS
sanjayah uvaca--Sanjaya said; iti--thus; arjunam--unto Arjuna;
vasudevah--Krsna; tatha--that way; uktva--saying; svakam--His own;
rupam--form; darsayam asa--showed; bhuyah--again; asvasayam asa--also
convinced him; ca--also; bhitam--fearful; enam--him; bhutva punah--
becoming again; saumya-vapuh--beautiful form; maha-atma--the great one.
TRANSLATION
Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna,
while speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form, and
at last He showed him His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful
Arjuna.
PURPORT
When Krsna appeared as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, He first of all
appeared as four-armed Narayana, but when He was requested by His
parents, He transformed Himself into an ordinary child in appearance.
Similarly, Krsna knew that Arjuna was not interested in seeing a four-
handed form of Krsna, but since he asked to see this four-handed form,
He also showed him this form again and then showed Himself in His two-
handed form. The word saumya-vapuh is very significant. Saumya-vapuh is
a very beautiful form; it is known as the most beautiful form. When He
was present, everyone was attracted simply by Krsna's form, and because
Krsna is director of the universe, He just banished the fear of Arjuna,
His devotee, and showed him again His beautiful form of Krsna. In the
Brahma-samhita (5.38) it is stated, premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-
vilocanena: only a person whose eyes are smeared with the ointment of
love can see the beautiful form of Sri Krsna.
TEXT 51
arjuna uvaca
drstvedam manusam rupam
tava saumyam janardana
idanim asmi samvrttah
sa-cetah prakrtim gatah
SYNONYMS
arjunah uvaca--Arjuna said; drstva--seeing; idam--this; manusam--human
being; rupam--form; tava--Your; saumyam--very beautiful; janardana--O
chastiser of the enemies; idanim--just now; asmi--I am; samvrttah--
settled; sa-cetah--in my consciousness; prakrtim--my own; gatah--I am.
TRANSLATION
When Arjuna thus saw Krsna in His original form, he said: Seeing this
humanlike form, so very beautiful, my mind is now pacified and I am
restored to my original nature.
PURPORT
Here the words manusam rupam clearly indicate the Supreme Personality
of Godhead to be originally two-handed. Those who deride Krsna to be an
ordinary person are shown here to be ignorant of His divine nature. If
Krsna is like an ordinary human being, then how is it possible for Him
to show the universal form and again to show the four-handed Narayana
form? So it is very clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita that one who thinks
that Krsna is an ordinary person and misguides the reader by claiming
that it is the impersonal Brahman within Krsna speaking, is doing the
greatest injustice. Krsna has actually shown His universal form and His
four-handed Visnu form. So how can He be an ordinary human being? A
pure devotee is not confused by misguiding commentaries on Bhagavad-
gita because he knows what is what. The original verses of Bhagavad-
gita are as clear as the sun; they do not require lamp-light from
foolish commentators.
TEXT 52
sri-bhagavan uvaca
su-durdarsam idam rupam
drstavan asi yan mama
deva apy asya rupasya
nityam darsana-kanksinah
SYNONYMS
sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; su-
durdarsam--very difficult to be seen; idam--this; rupam--form; drstavan
asi--as you have seen; yat--which; mama--of Mine; devah--the demigods;
api asya--also this; rupasya--form; nityam--eternally; darsana-
kanksinah--always aspire to see.
TRANSLATION
The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, the form which you are now
seeing is very difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever seeking
the opportunity to see this form which is so dear.
PURPORT
In the forty-eighth verse of this chapter Lord Krsna concluded
revealing His universal form and informed Arjuna that this form is not
possible to be seen by so many activities, sacrifices, etc. Now here
the word su-durdarsam is used, indicating that Krsna's two-handed form
is still more confidential. One may be able to see the universal form
of Krsna by adding a little tinge of devotional service to various
activities like penance, Vedic study and philosophical speculation,
etc. It may be possible, but without a tinge of bhakti, one cannot see;
that has already been explained. Still, beyond that universal form, the
form of Krsna as a two-handed man is still more difficult to see, even
for demigods like Brahma and Lord Siva. They desire to see Him, and we
have evidence in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that when He was supposed to be
in the womb of His mother, Devaki, all the demigods from heaven came to
see the marvel of Krsna. They even waited to see Him. A foolish person
may deride Him, but that is an ordinary person. Krsna is actually
desired to be seen by demigods like Brahma and Siva in His two-armed
form.
In Bhagavad-gita (9.11) it is also confirmed, avajananti mam mudha
manusim tanum asritah: He is not visible to the foolish persons who
deride Him. Krsna's body, as confirmed by Brahma-samhita and confirmed
by Krsna Himself in Bhagavad-gita, is completely spiritual and full of
bliss and eternality. His body is never like a material body. But for
some who make a study of Krsna by reading Bhagavad-gita or similar
Vedic scriptures, Krsna is a problem. For one using a material process,
Krsna is considered to be a great historical personality and very
learned philosopher. But He isn't an ordinary man.  But some think that
even though He was so powerful, He had to accept a material body.
Ultimately they think that the Absolute Truth is impersonal; therefore
they think that from His impersonal feature He assumed a personal
feature attached to material nature. This is a materialistic
calculation of the Supreme Lord. Another calculation is speculative.
Those who are in search of knowledge also speculate on Krsna and
consider Him to be less important than the universal form of the
Supreme. Thus some think that the universal form of Krsna which was
manifested to Arjuna is more important than His personal form.
According to them, the personal form of the Supreme is something
imaginary. They believe that in the ultimate issue, the Absolute Truth
is not a person. But the transcendental process is described in
Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Two: to hear about Krsna from authorities. That
is the actual Vedic process, and those who are actually in the Vedic
line hear about Krsna from authority, and by repeated hearing about
Him, Krsna becomes dear. As we have several times discussed, Krsna is
covered by His yoga-maya potency. He is not to be seen or revealed to
anyone and everyone. Only by one to whom He reveals Himself can He be
seen. This is confirmed in Vedic literature; for one who is a
surrendered soul, the Absolute Truth can actually be understood. The
transcendentalist, by continuous Krsna consciousness and devotional
service to Krsna, can have his spiritual eyes opened and can see Krsna
by revelation. Such a revelation is not possible even for the demigods;
therefore it is difficult even for the demigods to understand Krsna in
His two-handed form. The conclusion is that although to see the
universal form of Krsna is very, very difficult and not possible for
anyone and everyone, it is still more difficult to understand His
personal form as Syamasundara.
TEXT 53
naham vedair na tapasa
na danena na cejyaya
sakya evam-vidho drastum
drstavan asi mam yatha
SYNONYMS
na--never; aham--I; vedaih--by study of the Vedas; na--never; tapasa--
by serious penances; na--never; danena--by charity; na--never; ca--
also; ijyaya--by worship; sakyah--it is possible; evam-vidhah--like
this; drastum--to see; drstavan--seeing; asi--you are; mam--Me; yatha--
as.
TRANSLATION
The form which you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be
understood simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing serious
penances, nor by charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means that
one can see Me as I am.
PURPORT
Krsna first appeared before His parents Devaki and Vasudeva in a four-
handed form, and then He transformed Himself into the two-handed form.
This mystery is very difficult to understand for those who are atheists
or who are devoid of devotional service. For scholars who have simply
studied Vedic literature by way of speculation or mere academic
interest, Krsna is not easy to understand. Nor is He to be understood
by persons who officially go to the temple to offer worship. They make
their visit, but they cannot understand Krsna as He is. Krsna can be
understood only through the path of devotional service, as explained by
Krsna Himself in the next verse.
TEXT 54
bhaktya tv ananyaya sakya
aham evam-vidho 'rjuna
jnatum drastum ca tattvena
pravestum ca parantapa
SYNONYMS
bhaktya--by devotional service; tu--but; ananyaya--without being mixed
with fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; sakyah--possible;
aham--I; evam-vidhah--like this; arjuna--O Arjuna; jnatum--to know;
drastum--to see; ca--and; tattvena--in fact; pravestum--and to enter
into; ca--also; parantapa--O mighty-armed one.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be
understood as I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly.
Only in this way can you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.
PURPORT
Krsna can be understood only by the process of undivided devotional
service. He explicitly explains this in this verse so unauthorized
commentators, who try to understand Bhagavad-gita by the speculative
process, will know that they are simply wasting their time. No one can
understand Krsna or how He came from parents in a four-handed form and
at once changed Himself into a two-handed form. It is clearly stated
here that no one can see Him. Those who, however, are very experienced
students of Vedic literature can learn about Him from the Vedic
literature in so many ways. There are so many rules and regulations,
and if one at all wants to understand Krsna, he must follow the
regulative principles described in the authoritative literature. One
can perform penance in accordance with those principles. As far as
charity is concerned, it is plain that charity should be given to the
devotees of Krsna who are engaged in His devotional service to spread
the Krsna philosophy or Krsna consciousness throughout the world. Krsna
consciousness is a benediction to humanity. Lord Caitanya was
appreciated by Rupa Gosvami as the most munificent man of charity
because love of Krsna, which is very difficult to achieve, was
distributed freely by Him. And if one worships as prescribed in the
temple (in the temples in India there is always some statue, usually of
Visnu or Krsna), that is a chance to progress by offering worship and
respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the beginners in
devotional service to the Lord, temple worship is essential, and this
is confirmed in the Vedic literature.
One who has unflinching devotion for the Supreme Lord and is directed
by the spiritual master, can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead by
revelation. For one who does not take personal training under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, it is impossible to even
begin to understand Krsna. The word tu is specifically used here to
indicate that no other process can be used, can be recommended, or can
be successful in understanding Krsna.
The personal forms of Krsna, the two-handed form and the four-handed,
are completely different from the temporary universal form shown to
Arjuna. The four-handed form is Narayana and the two-handed form is
Krsna; they are eternal and transcendental, whereas the universal form
exhibited to Arjuna is temporary. The very word sudurdarsam, meaning
difficult to see, suggests that no one saw that universal form. It also
suggests that amongst the devotees there was no necessity of showing
it. That form was exhibited by Krsna at the request of Arjuna because
in the future, when one represents himself as an incarnation of God,
people can ask to see his universal form.
Krsna changes from the universal form to the four-handed form of
Narayana and then to His own natural form of two hands. This indicates
that the four-handed forms and other forms mentioned in Vedic
literature are all emanations of the original two-handed Krsna. He is
the origin of all emanations. Krsna is distinct even from these forms,
what to speak of the impersonal conception. As far as the four-handed
forms of Krsna are concerned, it is stated clearly that even the most
identical four-handed form of Krsna (which is known as Maha-Visnu, who
is lying on the cosmic ocean and from whose breathing so many
innumerable universes are passing out and entering) is also an
expansion of the Supreme Lord. Therefore one should conclusively
worship the personal form of Krsna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who is eternity, bliss and knowledge. He is the source of all
forms of Visnu, He is the source of all forms of incarnation, and He is
the original Supreme Personality, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita.
In the Vedic literature it is stated that the Supreme Absolute Truth is
a person. His name is Krsna, and He sometimes descends on this earth.
Similarly, in Srimad-Bhagavatam there is a description of all kinds of
incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and there it is
said that Krsna is not an incarnation of God but is the original
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam).
Similarly, in Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, mattah parataram nanyat:
"There is nothing superior to My form as the Personality of Godhead
Krsna." He also says elsewhere in Bhagavad-gita, aham adir hi devanam:
"I am the origin of all the demigods." And after understanding
Bhagavad-gita from Krsna, Arjuna also confirms this in the following
words: param brahma param dhama pavitram-paramam bhavan: "I now fully
understand that You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Absolute Truth, and that You are the refuge of everything." Therefore
the universal form which Krsna showed to Arjuna is not the original
form of God. The original is the Krsna form. The universal form, with
its thousands and thousands of heads and hands, is manifest just to
draw the attention of those who have no love for God. It is not God's
original form.
The universal form is not attractive for pure devotees, who are in love
with the Lord in different transcendental relationships. The Supreme
Godhead exchanges transcendental love in His original form of Krsna.
Therefore to Arjuna, who was so intimately related with Krsna in
friendship, this form of the universal manifestation was not pleasing;
rather, it was fearful. Arjuna, who is a constant companion of Krsna's,
must have had transcendental eyes; he was not an ordinary man.
Therefore he was not captivated by the universal form. This form may
seem wonderful to persons who are involved in elevating themselves by
fruitive activities, but to persons who are engaged in devotional
service, the two-handed form of Krsna is the most dear.
TEXT 55
mat-karma-krn mat-paramo
mad-bhaktah sanga-varjitah
nirvairah sarva-bhutesu
yah sa mam eti pandava
SYNONYMS
mat-karma-krt--engaged in doing My work; mat-paramah--considering Me
the Supreme; mat-bhaktah--engaged in My devotional service; sanga-
varjitah--freed from the contamination of previous activities and
mental speculation; nirvairah--without an enemy; sarva-bhutesu--to
every living entity yah--one who; sah--he; mam--unto Me; eti--comes;
pandava--O son of Pandu.
TRANSLATION
My dear Arjuna, one who is engaged in My pure devotional service, free
from the contaminations of previous activities and from mental
speculation, who is friendly to every living entity, certainly comes to
Me.
PURPORT
Anyone who wants to approach the supreme of all the Personalities of
Godhead, on the Krsnaloka planet in the spiritual sky, and be
intimately connected with the Supreme Personality, Krsna, must take
this formula, as is stated by the Supreme Himself. Therefore, this
verse is considered to be the essence of Bhagavad-gita. The Bhagavad-
gita is a book directed to the conditioned souls, who are engaged in
the material world with the purpose of lording it over nature and who
do not know of the real, spiritual life. The Bhagavad-gita is meant to
show how one can understand his spiritual existence and his eternal
relationship with the supreme spiritual personality and to teach one
how to go back home, back to Godhead. Now here is the verse which
clearly explains the process by which one can attain success in his
spiritual activity: devotional service.
As far as work is concerned, one should transfer his energy entirely to
Krsna conscious activities. No work should be done by any man except in
relationship to Krsna. This is called krsna-karma. One may be engaged
in various activities, but one should not be attached to the result of
his work, but the result should be done for Him. For example, one may
be engaged in business, but to transform that activity into Krsna
consciousness, one has to do business for Krsna. If Krsna is the
proprietor of the business, then Krsna should enjoy the profit of the
business. If a businessman is in possession of thousands and thousands
of dollars, and if he has to offer all this to Krsna, he can do it.
This is work for Krsna. Instead of constructing a big building for his
sense gratification, he can construct a nice temple for Krsna, and he
can install the Deity of Krsna and arrange for the Deity's service, as
is outlined in the authorized books of devotional service. This is all
krsna-karma. One should not be attached to the result of his work, but
the result should be offered to Krsna. One should also accept as
prasadam, food, the remnants of offerings to Krsna. If one constructs a
very big building for Krsna and installs the Deity of Krsna, one is not
prohibited from living there, but it is understood that the proprietor
of the building is Krsna. That is called Krsna consciousness. If,
however, one is not able to construct a temple for Krsna, one can
engage himself in cleansing the temple of Krsna; that is also krsna-
karma. One can cultivate a garden. Anyone who has land--in India, at
least, any poor man has a certain amount of land--can utilize that for
Krsna by growing flowers to offer Him. One can sow tulasi plants,
because tulasi leaves are very important, and Krsna has recommended
this in Bhagavad-gita. Patram puspam phalam toyam. Krsna desires that
one offer Him either a leaf, or a flower, or fruit, or a little water--
and He is satisfied. This leaf especially refers to the tulasi. So one
can sow tulasi and pour water on the plant. Thus, even the poorest man
can engage in the service of Krsna. These are some of the examples of
how one can engage in working for Krsna.
The word mat-paramah refers to one who considers the association of
Krsna in His supreme abode to be the highest perfection of life. Such a
person does not wish to be elevated to the higher planets such as the
moon or sun or heavenly planets, or even the highest planet of this
universe, Brahmaloka. He has no attraction for that. He is only
attracted to being transferred to the spiritual sky. And even in the
spiritual sky he is not satisfied with merging into the glowing
brahmajyoti effulgence, for he wants to enter into the highest
spiritual planet, namely Krsnaloka, Goloka Vrndavana. He has full
knowledge of that planet, and therefore he is not interested in any
other. As indicated by the word mad-bhaktah, he fully engages in
devotional service, specifically in the nine processes of devotional
engagement: hearing, chanting, remembering, worshiping, serving the
lotus feet of the Lord, offering prayers, carrying out the orders of
the Lord, making friends with Him, and surrendering everything to Him.
One can engage in all nine devotional processes, or eight, or seven, or
at least in one, and that will surely make one perfect.
The term sanga-varjitah is very significant. One should disassociate
himself from persons who are against Krsna. Not only are the atheistic
persons against Krsna, but so also are those who are attracted to
fruitive activities and mental speculation. Therefore the pure form of
devotional service is described in Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.11) as
follows:
anyabhilasita-sunyam
jnana-karmady-anavrtam
anukulyena krsnanu-
silanam bhaktir uttama
In this verse Srila Rupa Gosvami clearly states that if anyone wants to
execute unalloyed devotional service, he must be freed from all kinds
of material contamination. He must be freed from the association of
persons who are addicted to fruitive activities and mental speculation.
When, freed from such unwanted association and from the contamination
of material desires, one favorably cultivates knowledge of Krsna, that
is called pure devotional service. Anukulyasya sankalpah pratikulyasya
varjanam (Hari-bhakti-vilasa 11.676). One should think of Krsna and act
for Krsna favorably, not unfavorably. Kamsa was an enemy of Krsna's.
From the very beginning of Krsna's birth, he planned in so many ways to
kill Him, and because he was always unsuccessful, he was always
thinking of Krsna. Thus while working, while eating and while sleeping,
he was always Krsna conscious in every respect, but that Krsna
consciousness was not favorable, and therefore in spite of his always
thinking of Krsna twenty-four hours a day, he was considered a demon,
and Krsna at last killed him. Of course anyone who is killed by Krsna
attains salvation immediately, but that is not the aim of the pure
devotee. The pure devotee does not even want salvation. He does not
want to be transferred even to the highest planet, Goloka Vrndavana.
His only objective is to serve Krsna wherever he may be.
A devotee of Krsna is friendly to everyone. Therefore it is said here
that he has no enemy (nirvairah). How is this? A devotee situated in
Krsna consciousness knows that only devotional service to Krsna can
relieve a person from all the problems of life. He has personal
experience of this, and therefore he wants to introduce this system,
Krsna consciousness, into human society. There are many examples in
history of devotees of the Lord risking their lives for the spreading
of God consciousness. The favorite example is Lord Jesus Christ. He was
crucified by the nondevotees, but he sacrificed his life for spreading
God consciousness. Of course, it would be superficial to understand
that he was killed. Similarly, in India also there are many examples,
such as Thakura Haridasa and Prahlada Maharaja. Why such risk? Because
they wanted to spread Krsna consciousness, and it is difficult. A Krsna
conscious person knows that if a man is suffering, it is due to his
forgetfulness of his eternal relationship with Krsna. Therefore, the
highest benefit one can render to human society is relieving one's
neighbor from all material problems. In such a way, a pure devotee is
engaged in the service of the Lord. Now, we can imagine how merciful
Krsna is to those engaged in His service, risking everything for Him.
Therefore it is certain that such persons must reach the supreme planet
after leaving the body.
In summary, the universal form of Krsna, which is a temporary
manifestation, and the form of time which devours everything, and even
the form of Visnu, four-handed, have all been exhibited by Krsna. Thus
Krsna is the origin of all these manifestations. It is not that Krsna
is a manifestation of the original visva-rupa, or Visnu. Krsna is the
origin of all forms. There are hundreds and thousands of Visnus, but
for a devotee, no form of Krsna is important but the original form,
two-handed Syamasundara. In the Brahma-samhita it is stated that those
who are attached to the Syamasundara form of Krsna in love and devotion
can see Him always within the heart and cannot see anything else. One
should understand, therefore, that the purport of this Eleventh Chapter
is that the form of Krsna is essential and supreme.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta Purports to the Eleventh Chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad-gita in the matter of the Universal Form.